Alonso surprised by double success

Fernando Alonso admitted his victories in Singapore and at Sunday's Japanese Grand Prix have taken him by surprise.
The Renault driver profited from mistakes from the frontrunners to surge ahead on the Fuji Speedway circuit.

He then battled with BMW Sauber's Robert Kubica for the lead and eventually gained the upper hand to secure back-to-back victories for the first time in two years.

Alonso suffered misfortune in qualifying in Singapore a fortnight ago but took advantage of the appearance of the safety car to climb from 15th to win the inaugural night race.

On Sunday, the Spaniard started fourth on the grid but as Formula One World Championship leader Lewis Hamilton and Felipe Massa collided early on, Alonso worked his way towards the front of the field.

And when asked how much of a surprise the two wins have been, he said: "A lot obviously.

"The first one was a surprise because I started 15th and obviously you never expect to win a race starting in that position.

"This one is still a surprise as even though I started fourth in a good position we thought we didn't have the pace to win the race.

"So when I found myself second after turn one I tried to be close enough for Robert (Kubica) and then fight with him for second, third or fourth place.

"But then I realised after the second stint that I had the possibility of winning and if I had no mistakes this win was for me."

Renault boss Flavio Briatore believes Alonso's success confirms that the team are heading back to the top.

Nelson Piquet finished fifth to cap a fine day for Renault and Briatore praised the whole team for their hard work throughout the season.

"I am very happy as this is a superb result for the team, Fernando, Nelson and Renault," he said. "The victory is well deserved.

"Our strategy worked wonderfully and after our difficult start to the season I want to thank all the members of the team for their efforts.

"We had said that we could come back to the top and we confirmed that here.
