Michael Jackson Biogrpahy

The self-titled "King of Pop," Michael Jackson has led a troubled and controversial private life while releasing a string of hit albums, including Thriller, currently the most popular record of all time with total sales of 46 million. Born on August 29, 1958 to a strict, working-class family in Gary, Ind., Michael showed an early interest in music, as did most of the family -- his mother sang frequently, and his father played guitar in a small-time R&B band, while his older brothers often sang and played with their father's guitar. Joseph Jackson, Michael's controlling, allegedly abusive father, pushed his sons into forming a group called the Jackson 5, which quickly rose from playing local talent shows to landing a contract with the renowned Motown label. During the early '70s the group became well-known, with "baby" Michael as the cute lead singer of the group. The Jackson 5 released 13 albums in only seven years, charted several No. 1 R&B hits, and toured constantly. Michael Jackson also recorded a few solo albums with Motown, but in 1976 the entire Jackson family split with the label over creative issues -- Joseph Jackson felt producer Berry Gordy was spending too much time with Diana Ross, and not enough with the Jackson 5.

Signing with Epic later that year, the Jackson 5 became the Jacksons, with Randy replacing Jermaine (who stayed with Motown), and continued recording, though they were not quite as popular as before. In 1979 Michael landed the role of the Scarecrow in the Broadway musical The Wiz, and moved to New York to start an independent life. Collaborating with his friend Quincy Jones, already an established R&B hitmaker, Jackson recorded his first solo album, Off the Wall, later that year. The album eclipsed the declining success of the Jacksons, reaching No. 3 and spawning four Top 10 hits. After returning to his brothers for another album and tour, Jackson released his second solo effort, 1982's Thriller. Michael's following swelled overnight, transforming him from another pop star to one of the biggest artists in pop history. Thriller spent 37 weeks at No. 1 and sold 24 million copies, spinning off MTV hits like "Beat It" and "Billy Jean," and the title single, which was accompanied by an innovative half-hour-long video which was also released in movie theaters. Jackson became a media icon thanks to his trademarks: stunning break-dancing moves (especially the "Moonwalk"), a shy, girlish voice, a single white sequined glove, sunglasses and untied shoe laces. Teenagers copied his style and fans screamed and passed out at his sold-out concerts, known for their elaborate pageantry. Michael also used his new status to raise money for numerous charities, especially children's causes; he also became a pitchman for Pepsi, sustaining severe burns during an accident filming a commercial for the soft drink.

Despite his new superstar solo status, Jackson performed and toured once more with his brothers in 1984, a gracious move which boosted each of the other Jackson's solo careers, none of which was very successful. Sister Janet also got into the act, eventually becoming a superstar in her own right; his older sister LaToya also began performing. The reclusive Jackson bought an enormous California ranch, which he dubbed Neverland, and filled the grounds with amusement park rides, inviting children to visit and even stay with him. His penchant for plastic surgery, mysteriously lightening skin tone, and often bizarre behavior (such as wearing a surgical mask in public Howard Hughes-style) made him a frequent target for tabloids. Furthermore, Jackson's reluctance to grant interviews encouraged groundless gossip, such as stories that he slept in an oxygen chamber and tried to purchase the Elephant Man's skeleton. In 1985 he did buy ATV Publishing, which owned the rights to many Beatles songs (as well as material from Elvis, Little Richard, and others), a profitable business decision but a move which ruined his friendship with Paul McCartney. That same year Jackson was instrumental in the USA for Africa famine relief operation, recording the No. 1 "We Are the World" single with an all-star ensemble of musicians.

Michael Jackson released his long-awaited follow-up, Bad, in 1987. Though it naturally reached No. 1 and sold around eight million copies, spawning five No. 1 singles, it failed to match the commercial success of Thriller. Another elaborate world tour followed; although he drew tens of thousands overseas, his U.S. concerts were troubled by allegations that Jackson lip-synched most of his material, which he later admitted in interviews. 1991's Dangerous was another No. 1 success for Jackson, though it once again failed to match the success of its predecessor, perhaps because it was symbolically knocked out of No. 1 by Nirvana's Nevermind, marking the shift from pop music to "grunge."

Following the release of Dangerous, Jackson remained an international superstar, but in the United States his image was being eroded by continued rumors of erratic behavior and child molestation. In 1993 a child "friend" of Jackson's went to his father with reports that Jackson had molested him. The boy's father brought the case to the police, who began an investigation of the pop star but were unable to press charges when his main accuser received an undisclosed settlement from Jackson and subsequently declined to testify. On May 26, 1994, Michael Jackson married Lisa Marie Presley, a move which many observers saw as an attempt to downplay pedophilia rumors.The couple divorced in early 1996; Jackson married acquaintance Debbie Rowe later that year, and the couple had their first child (also the subject of rumors) in February 1997.

HIStory, released in 1995, was accompanied by unprecedented hype, including videos of hundred-foot statues of Jackson being pulled through the streets of Eastern Europe. The double-album consisted of one disc of "greatest hits" and another of new material, including the Top 5 single "Scream" (a duet with sister Janet) and the song "They Don't Care About U.S.," which became the subject of controversy due to anti-Semitic lyrics (the song was later changed). The release was supported by another over-the-top world tour. HIStory sold respectably by most standards, though it couldn't justify the $30 million Sony spent on publicity; the media blitz was noticably scaled down for Jackson's next (and most recent) release, Blood On The Dance Floor, released in 1997.

Jackson was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in March 2001. The same year, plans were made for a mammoth concert at NYC's Madison Square Garden to celebrate his 30th anniversary as a solo artist. Besides tributes to Jackson by the likes of Whitney Houston, Britney Spears and N' Sync, the concert is slated to include the first onstage appearance of the Jacksons in nearly two decades.
