Diabetes: A Pervasive and Growing American Plague

It is extremely important that diabetics know and understand their problem intimately. It is also imperative that diabetics take responsibility for their condition, understanding that the root cause is in the standard America

Approximately 19 million Americans suffer from diabetes mellitus. This is a condition wherein the beta cells of the Isles of Langerhans in the pancreas lose their ability to secrete insulin, either partially or wholly. As a result, sugar collects in the blood until danger levels are reached unless the kidneys dispose of the sugar overload in a step called "glycosuria." Either way, the situation is bad. In the first instance, coma and death can occur and, in the second instance, eating is partly wasted because of lost sugars.

It is critical that diabetics know how to monitor themselves and conduct their lives as much as possible in accord with their natural disposition. Many who have been put on insulin can also get off of it safely. And for those who are having a difficult time getting off insulin, it is vitally important that you radically reduce your intake of this toxic, alien protein. As well as easing the lives of diabetics, insulin is also a cause of yet other problems.

Diabetes is a degenerative disease wherein the beta cells of the Islets of Langerhans have been impaired or destroyed. The beta cells secrete the sugar carrier called insulin. Insulin takes sugar molecules from the blood and transports them into first the interstitial fluid and then into the cells where thousands of mitochondrial residents combust them by adding oxygen and deriving Andenosine-TriPhosphate (ATP) therefrom. Sugar is thus converted into the energy that we constantly use. In the mitochondria of the cells, glucose is converted to ATP. This is instant energy when we require it. In a very real sense it’s like converting compounds to powder that may be fired instantly. The brain takes up the glucose from the blood without the benefit of insulin.

Impairment or destruction of the beta cells results from drugs and other toxic substances. The destruction of the membranes of the islets usually occurs simultaneously to the derangement or destruction of the beta cells. These are also destroyed by putrefaction’s byproducts absorbed from the intestinal tract, especially from those created by bacteria that thrive in partially digested cooked proteins. In other words, by continually eating already rotted proteins such as cheese and fermented soybean products, these pancreatic faculties are eventually destroyed. Pasteurized, homogenized milk and dairy products have been indicted by several researchers as contributing to the current diabetes epidemic.

In children the onset of diabetes may be sudden and rather thoroughgoing; that is, the beta cells may be virtually destroyed within a very short period of time. This is known as juvenile onset diabetes and is rarely reversible. The foremost cause in children is from cow’s milk and infant formula. (Are we to forever remain the unweaned parasite of the cow?)

In adults, diabetes to some extent may be long suffered before the onset of any symptoms leading to its eventual diagnosis. Destruction of the beta cells may be minimal. The insulin produced may be deranged such that it is ineffective. Or, the consumption of fatty foods may be excessive. In the presence of fats, insulin’s ability to take up sugar is seriously reduced. There are other factors that also interfere with sugar uptake.

High blood sugar may not always occur as a result of diabetes. Within range, sugar readings in diabetics may be accompanied by drastic weight loss. Instead of accumulating the sugar, the body passes it off through the urine. While the brain takes its sugar directly from the blood, the cells do not. Insulin picks up sugar in the bloodstream and must first transport the sugar through the interstitial walls. The cells are bathed by interstitial fluid. If the insulin does not pick up the sugar in the blood, it will get to neither the interstitial fluid nor the cells.

When sugar is not made available to the cells, several events and changes occur. First, sugar accumulates in the blood. This sugar can accumulate until a diabetic coma is experienced. Or the body can extract the sugar from the blood as it passes through the kidneys, and pass it off through the urine, a process known as glycosuria. When sugar is not available to the cells, the body uses stored fat. The cells use the fat instead of sugar. This reduces the fat reserves, resulting in weight-loss. However, the conversion of fat to energy also converts a part of the fat, glycerol, into a sugar called glycerose. This, too, can accumulate in the blood or be passed off through glycosuria. That part of the brain which must have glucose will obtain it from the bloodstream in the form of glycerose if sugar is not otherwise available.

How much sugar can be in the blood without any adverse symptoms occurring? The ideal blood sugar levels are proclaimed to vary between 80 and 120. At our fasting institutions, we had both diabetics and non-diabetics testing themselves while both fasting and eating. There appeared to be no danger to anyone when blood sugar readings were between 40 and 400. There are wide swings in the sugar levels of non-diabetics, sometimes going to a reading of three times the ideal high and as much as 50 percent below the lower range said to be ideal. When diabetics got into trouble, the blood sugar was usually well above 600.

There are additional problems that diabetics on insulin can experience. One result is body deteriorization due to the toxic alien protein that insulin represents. Long insulin intake usually causes vascular degeneration, artherosclerosis, foot and toe problems leading to over 40,000 amputations per year, blindness and, in some cases, ketosis. There must always be adequate water intake lest vomiting and dehydration occur. I have spoken with many diabetics who have experienced this on several occasions. They had to be rushed to the hospital for rehydration and adequate electrolytes.

So how should a diabetic deal with this problem? Prior to 1922, when pig insulin was introduced, the treatment of choice was fasting!

I have witnessed quite a number of recoveries from the diabetic condition. Fasting or a new raw diet of mostly fruits, melons, some vegetables, raw (unroasted, unsalted) seeds and nuts vastly improves the health condition of all diabetics. About 40 percent of those with adult onset diabetes are able to overcome their diabetic condition totally, especially those who have been on insulin for less than two years. I have seen diabetics on 50 to 70 units of insulin per day reduce their insulin intake to 10 to 15 units and maintain their sugar levels under 200. Even with people who have juvenile onset diabetes, we have found that they are able to reduce their insulin dosage while experiencing improvements in their overall health.

Monitoring blood sugar levels is one of the duties of the diabetic. I have witnessed diabetics drop their insulin injections altogether just by going on a raw foods diet. They always monitored themselves carefully and found that as long as their blood sugar count remained under 400, they were able to refrain from taking insulin. Although about 40 percent of those who fast and go on a raw foods diet can drop their insulin injections altogether, the rest simply monitor their blood sugar daily and find that if their blood sugar count is over 400, they can get away with taking 10 units of insulin three or four times a week.

In closing I trust that you now see the basic causes of diabetes and understand the course others have followed to stop and reverse it, or to better cope with it. Due to the nefarious medical/pharmaceutical industry’s control of the media and education systems, a healthy sense of skepticism regarding mainstream medical information is vitally important in these trying times. 
