Sound Effect - Thrill in Watching Magic Tricks
By Eliza Maledevic Platinum Quality Author

Article Word Count: 415   [View Summary] Comments (0)

Fun, entertainment and amazement is what you will have in watching magic show. Great magicians are used to that applause of his viewers in every magic performance they have done. And as a spectator, you can't help it but give the appreciation that you have seen watching a great performance.

Performing magic is not easy, there are lot of things you need to learn and it actually takes time to be famous and known to people. As seen on TV there are magician who have been established a name in the field of magic. Doing different gimmicks is what they need to do to be recognized by their viewers.

Being a magician you should be creative enough in thinking what would the people want to see during your show. You must put your feet on their shoe to know and understand what viewers expecting want to expect on your performance. Of course there should always a sense of surprise and intensity, intensity that the audience are some how be carried away on what you are doing.

Learn how to get your viewers attention and focus on what you are doing. Make them involve on your show by asking someone to volunteer and be one of the props to make a magic trick possible. Of course there is a thrill on that, and will surely be an intense performance knowing that other viewers seen that you have ask someone to participate on your show. Of course those who have not volunteered will just watch you over and feel the intensity of the pressure that you have.

Most of these viewers are wise enough to conclude what will happen next, you should think of some twist so that your performance is unpredictable. That is what most audience like expecting the unexpected. And of course you should not forget to say some lines while performing a magic trick, viewers usually got bored if the place is too silent, if you are not a type of person who talks during a performance, you may ask someone to play a background music or sound effect during your performance. This will increase the intensity of the crowd watching you; it will add more thrill and excitement and feel the nerves of your crowd. Sound effect should be appropriate to your performance and it must put some reaction on your audience, it can be a beat from the drum or cymbals or any sound that add thrill on your magic trick performance.


