Brief History of Antique China Ceramics
By K Amber
K Amber
Level: Basic PLUS

A person who believe Life is Fun and Easy. We must have simple ways in reaching our goals. ...

Antique china ceramics have evolved since 1523BC. However, not until the middle 14 century, the blue and white porcelain which became the principal product of China's ceramic industry. Since then, the antique china ceramics became a truly utilitarian and highly decorative porcelain ware which lasted for centuries. The production of elegant antique china wares became the ultimate enjoyment worldwide and sought approval and demand of many enthusiastic antique collectors everywhere.

Briefly, the Sung Dynasty which dated from 690 - 1279 sought high artistic achievement and aristocratic taste. These was reflected in the elegant refined shapes and variety achieving the production of the famous cool monochrome wares such as the deep olive of green of celadon. Antique china celadon had since carry its production till the Qing Dynasty. Near the end of the Sung dynasty, only the famous blue and white porcelain was created. The most common porcelain during the Sung Dynasty was the type known as Celadon. The Mongols began to assault the Sung Dynasty and in 1279, the Yuan Dynasty, or the Mongol empire began.

The Yuan Dynasty, which lasted from 1279-1368 A.D., was the first of only two times that the entire area of China was ruled by foreigners, As the Chinese nobility were not allowed to be involved in government, they were free to pursue yuan dynasty art and literature. During this time, a further period of experimentation of new porcelain material and innovation of antique china in decorative styles. With the successful use of imported cobalt blue for the painting of a clear glaze to produce a series of successful blue and white porcelain. Yuan Dynasty antiques never much love by the locals.

The Ming dynasty began in 1368, and lasted until 1644 A.D. The production of the porcelain of the antique china continues. Porcelain production and diversification occurred in the Ming Dynasty. Blue and white porcelain became the normal form, but experimentation in two color and even three color porcelain began. Imperial orders were given to manufacture large dragon bowls, incense vases, trays, stem cups. These varieties of shapes were made in celadon green or blue, blue and white ceramics forms, underglazed copper red and three colors were developed. In 1644, the Manchu began to attack Chinese cities thus set the beginning of the Qing Dynasty.

The Qing Dynasty in China were very successful as foreign rulers in China. They maintained their domination of the Chinese by preserving their own identity. The period of peace in Qing Dynasty allowed for growth in all areas. Commerce and international trade grew. This period of peace in Qing Dynasty has also allowed for the revival of arts and learning. Porcelain production continued to be important and innovations were made in the use of new colors. Colors that developed were shades of green, and compositions of black and yellow. A dark blue and brilliant red were also used. Traditional forms from all ages reappeared back at this time. One of Qing Dynasty innovation were painted porcelain of the enamel wares. Famille rose and enameling were the most utmost characteristic antique china of the Qing Dynasty porcelain.

This article serves to provide a further insight on the evolution of treasures antique china through the evolution of time.

K Amber

A resourceful on the evolution of antique china ceramics to understand the beauty and architecture of each China Dynasty brings with time.

http://asian-antiq.com/

Article Source: http://EzineArticles.com/?expert=K_Amber
	

