How High Can Superman Comics Soar?
By Virgil Vince

As far as movies go, Superman Returns was not one of the best. Not only did it receive so-so reviews from the critics, but it panned at the box office - barely able to make back its budget, especially after Warner Bros. dropped a mountain of marketing the box office gross couldn't hope the overtake. But though the movie may not have given Superman a second franchise, it did him something rather interesting: a son.

The story ran in the pages of the Superman: Last Son story arc, written by fan-favorite comic writer Geoff Johns along with a special guest - Richard Donner, director of the first Superman film. In the storyline, Superman finds he's no longer the Last Son of Krypton, though unlike the movie Superman Returns - where Superman is ultimately revealed to have a child as a result his tryst with Lois Lane in Superman 2 - this child is in fact revealed to be the son of Superman 2 baddies General Zod and Ursula.

Dubbed Chris Kent by Superman's good friend in Gotham, the boy was briefly raised by Clark and Lois in a relatively normal life, although as you might expect from any superhero arc, the tranquility last long. Soon, his biological father Zod re-emerged with the other Phantom Zone prisoners and invaded Earth. Though Superman repelled the invasion - with the unlikely aid of his adversary Lex Luthor, and his team the Superman Revenge Squad - Chris himself returned to the Phantom Zone in order to close it to prevent further reprisals from his father.

So in end Superman's adopted son went back home - but its unknown just how long his son will be gone. Superman isn't the only hero with parenting problem - Batman recently discovered he had a biological son by the name of Damian Wayne with Talia al Ghul, herself the daughter of Batman Begins baddie Ra's al Ghul. Though misguided and downright deceitful at times (the result of his upbringing), Damian genuinely wants to help his father as the Dark Knight, and one comic - Batman #666, set in the far, far future - maintains that he will eventually be the Dark Knight himself. Will Chris Kent ever take over his adopted father's mantle? We'll have to stay glued to Supes to find out.

Follow the exploits of rockers DEMON TWEAK and the racing clan HARD DRIVING HEROES, as they battle the evil trickster Loki at http://www.classic-comic-books.com. Also read articles on your favorite classic comic book heroes written by our resident historian VIRGIL THE STORYTELLER.
