Inversion 2Rc occurred at high frequency in Burkina Faso (83%) while its frequency was only 0.6% in samples from Cameroon, suggesting its involvement in ecogeographic cline from dry to more humid environments. Because An. nili is a forest-savannah transition species, polymorphic inversions could provide genetic plasticity that allowed its expansion into dry savannah and deforested areas of central Africa, where most of the human population is present. High frequencies of these inversions in savannah areas make them useful markers for studying ecological adaptations of this important vector.

4. Conclusion

Most of the work on malaria vectors has been conducted in the savannah environment, whereas principal vectors and their roles in malaria transmission in the immense African rainforest have barely been explored. Therefore, data are crucially lacking for a large part of Africa where malaria transmission is both intense and permanent throughout the year. Recent results demonstrated high levels of differentiation between populations/species of An. moucheti and the An. nili complex over short geographic distances within the forest block but not in the savannah. These data suggest that, unlike other major vectors, these mosquitoes originated and speciated in the equatorial forest. Because malaria elimination in forested areas is most difficult, detailed understanding of the genetic structure, gene flow, and species diversity of malaria vectors is important. Original information gained on the genetic structure of An. moucheti and An. nili can further be used to investigate genes for a signature of selection to uncover the genetic mechanisms of ecological adaptations, speciation, and susceptibility to Plasmodium, within a comparative framework that will use information available for other major human malaria vectors. Furthermore, because some species/populations within An. moucheti and the An. nili complex are highly exophagic/exophilic and can bite man as well as other vertebrates in remote areas, they are likely candidates for acting as bridge vectors, providing opportunities for wildlife pathogens to cause zoonosis in humans. These findings raise a concern in the light of recent reports confirming the circulation of various Plasmodium species, including strains of P. falciparum, in chimpanzees, gorillas, and guenons in the equatorial forest region