Highlights on Anopheles nili and Anopheles moucheti, Malaria Vectors in Africa

1. Introduction

Anopheles niliare major human malaria vectors in forested and humid savannah areas of West and Central AfricaYet, they remain critically understudied and basic knowledge on their biology, ecology and genetics is crucially lackingTo date, most studies of African malaria vectors have focused on An. gambiae, An. arabiensis, and An. funestus, in part, because molecular and cytogenetic tools for characterizing population structure, ecological adaptation, and taxonomic status of other species have been lacking until recently. Further, no laboratory colony is available for experimental work involving these neglected species. This gap in knowledge needs to be addressed for successful implementation of global strategies for malaria elimination and eradication in the Afrotropical region

ecological and genetic attributes that distinguish these species from the most well-known major African malaria vectors, providing opportunities for further research on neglected aspects of vector biology and control.

2. Anopheles moucheti and closely related species

Anopheles moucheti belongs to the series Myzomyia and closely resembles Anopheles marshallii Theobald of the Marshallii complex. This close morphological similarity resulted in An. moucheti being initially considered a variety of An. marshallii before it was raised to the rank of full species on the basis of morphological and bionomic differencesHowever the taxonomic status of An. moucheti has been subject to several interpretations during the past decades. Based on morphological similarities between An. bervoetsi and An. moucheti nigeriensis, Anopheles moucheti was later considered by Brunhes et al.as a group consisting of three morphological forms, namely An. moucheti moucheti (referred to as the type form), An. moucheti bervoetsi and An. moucheti nigeriensis distinguishable by slight morphological characters present at the adult and/or at the larval stagesIn their classification, Brunhes et al.referred to An. bervoetsi as a subspecies of An. moucheti while they suggested to put in synonymy An. m. nigeriensis and the type form. Genetic analysis conducted subsequently provided evidences against any taxonomic value for this morphological classificationRecent classification by Harbachrecognizes An. moucheti and An. bervoetsi as formal species while An. m. nigeriensis is considered as a morphological variant within An. moucheti.

Anopheles moucheti is widely distributed across West and Central Africa) whereas the two other taxa have only been reported so far from their type locality in Nigeria near Lagos (06째27'N; 03째24'E) for An. moucheti nigeriensis and in Tsakalakuku (06째34'S; 17째35'E) in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) for An. bervoetsi

Anopheles moucheti is among the most important human malaria vectors in the equatorial forest region of Africa, particularly in villages situated along slow moving rivers or streams where its larvae develop in and around floating vegetation and debrisLarval collections to assess ecological factors influencing An. moucheti distribution across river networks in south Cameroun showed that An. moucheti larvae are frequently associated with lentic rivers, low temperatures and the abundance of aquatic vegetation at the edge of the riverIncreased urbanization and deforestation as well as lower-scale landscape modification such as river banks cleaning for gardening and/or recreational purposes were shown to be highly detrimental to the species, fostering changes in the malaria vector system composition with a higher prevalence of An. gambiae, taking the lead over An. mouchetiInsecticide susceptibility tests conducted on several populations from South Cameroon in 2007 indicated that An. moucheti is fully susceptible to DDT, permethrin and deltamethrin (Etang et al., unpublished data).

In rural villages situated in deep forest areas, An. moucheti usually is the major vector of Plasmodium, and quite often the only one maintaining a high level of malaria endemicity in humans. Natural infection rates in the range 1-3% are commonly reported in wild females, sustaining annual entomological inoculation rates (EIR) reaching up to 300 infective bites/ human/yearAs such, the species has been incriminated in malaria transmission in a number of countries in Central Africa, including Nigeria, Equatorial GuineaIn these settings, An. moucheti frequently bites indoors and high densities of blood-fed females can be collected resting indoors, over 95% of which had taken their blood meal on humans demonstrating strong anthropophily. However, high mosquito densities might also be collected far from any human settlements, indicating a probable zoophilic behaviour in some forest populations

Anopheles bervoetsi has only been reported so far from its type locality and surrounding villages in the DRC. Larvae are found in small rivers sheltered by forest galleries that wind through the valleys in a hilly landscape. Adults are highly anthropophilic and preferentially bite

outdoors. However, it can be collected biting and resting indoors when abundance is high at the end of the rainy season (Antonio-Nkondjio et al. unpublished data). Biting occurs at night with a peak of activity usually recorded in the second part of the night. A recent study reported three specimens found infected by Plasmodium falciparum out of 237 tested by ELISA, confirming its role in malaria parasites transmission

Anopheles mosquitoes-New insights into malaria vectors

Anopheles m. nigeriensis is considered as a synonym to An. moucheti, due to the absence of reliable morphological differences at the adult and larval stages between the two morphs