Anopheles ovengensis, the most recently described species of the An. nili complex, is highly anthropophilic, and bites and rests frequently outdoorsHowever, studies conducted in Equatorial Guinea reported high densities collected by window exit traps indicating some degree of endophagic and endophilic behaviorAnopheles ovengensis usually displays high biting rates for humans, ranging from 50 to 300 bites/man/night along rivers where its larvae develop (Infection rates by P. falciparum ranges between 0.4 to 4.4% in specimens from Cameroonand in Equatorial GuineaLarvae are often found in sympatry with those of An. moucheti with whom it shares most of its distribution area. The distribution range of the species probably extends further East, throughout the Congolese forest basin but this has not been investigated yet.

Anopheles somalicus is strictly zoophilic. At the adult stage, An. somalicus closely resembles An. nili from which it can be morphologically separated at the larval stage onlyAdults are rarely recorded in villages although larvae are always found in sympatry with those of An. niliNothing is known of its bionomics. According toits distribution range includes Sierra Leone, Guinea, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Cameroon, Somalia and Tanzania.

Genetic studies conducted on the An. nili complex using various molecular markers confirmed the high genetic heterogeneity among its membersMultilocus enzyme analysis of the genetic variability detected species-specific alleles and large differences in shared allele frequencies among species of the complex collected in South CameroonAnalysis of sequence polymorphism in the rDNA ITS2 region estimated genetic distances in the range of 0.11-0.25 between the four speciesThis heterogeneity in ITS2 DNA sequences was further used to develop a PCR-based protocol for molecular identification of the different species within the complex (These data provided support for the recent taxonomic classification within the An. nili complex, An. somalicus (lanes 5 and 6), An. ovengensis (lanes 7 and 8) and An. carnevalei (lanes 9 and 10). Figure from

Microsatellite loci were developed in 2003 to allow for more in-depth population genetics investigationsA first comprehensive study explored the level of genetic variability and differentiation between nine populations of An. nili distributed in West and central Africa, including samples from Senegal, Ivory Coast, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Cameroon and the DRC using a set of 11 microsatellite markers and sequence variation in four genes within the nuclear rDNA subunit (ITS2 and D3) and mtDNA (COII and ND4). High genetic homogeneity was revealed among An. nili populations distributed from Senegal to Cameroon, suggesting shallow population substructure throughout the humid savannas of West Africa, in agreement with a weak effect of geographic distanceHowever, the population sampled in DRC was highly significantly differentiated from the core of West African populations (F ST >0.118, P<0.001), and all individuals segregated into a single genetic cluster separated from all other West African populations in Bayesian cluster analysis). Sequence variation in mtDNA genes matched these results, whereas low polymorphism in rDNA genes prevented detection of any population substructure at this geographical scale in savannah populationsExtensive allele sharing between populations and homogeneity across microsatellite loci in the level of genetic differentiation suggested that enhanced genetic drift in the DRC population, rather than selection was responsible for the observed pattern.

In Cameroon, the pattern of genetic differentiation was explored among species within the An. nili complex and between populations of An. nili collected in different ecological settings including the deep evergreen forest, deforested areas and savannah areas. The average observed heterozygosity varied from 0.359 for An. ovengensis to 0.661 for An. nili s.s. and mean pairwise F ST over all loci varied from 0.281 (between An. nili and An. carnevalei) to 0.416 (between An. somalicus and An. ovengensis) and were highly significant (P<0.0001)The limited number of loci which could readily amplify and the high proportion of loci departing from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in samples collected from the deep forest region suggested the presence of new taxonomic units in this area. Up to seven clusters could be identified in An. nili after processing Bayesian cluster analysis (Two of these clusters were specific for An. nili populations collected in the East Cameroon forest area, suggesting that An. nili from East Cameroon may consist of four new taxa. Data obtained from microsatellites analysis were consistent with the high genetic distance measured with rDNA and mtDNA genes

Recently, cytogenetic analysis depicted a physical chromosome map for An. nili upon which nine microsatellite markers could be mapped (Chromosomal arm homology with An. gambiae was assessed by fluorescent in situ hybridization of DNA probes which established that chromosomes X, 2R and 3R are homologous between the two species, while the 2L arm of An. gambiae corresponds to the 3L arm of An. nili, and vice versaPreliminary analysis of chromosomal polymorphism in natural An. nili populations from Burkina Faso and Cameroon demonstrated that two polymorphic inversions, named 2Rb and 2Rc, are often present simultaneously on the right arm of chromosome 2

Frequencies of inverted and standard 2Rb variants were almost equal in the savannah areas of Burkina Faso, albeit with strong deficit in heterozygotes (Fis=+0.603, P<0.0001). In forest areas of Cameroon, only the standard arrangement was found. It is postulated that this inversion may be involved in local ecological or behavioral adaptation in An. nili