Although these 'general' classifiers share a common, general classifying function, they derive from different lexical sources.

Individual languages also differ in the number of classifiers they use. For instance, Adang has 14 classifiers, while Kamang has only 2. In addition, each of the languages uses its classifiers to carve out semantic domains of a quite different nature. By way of illustration, consider the way in which the semantic categories of fruits and animals are classified. In Teiwa, fruits are classed according to their shape, while in Adang, fruits are classified together with animals and people) and Western Pantar classifies fruits with hissa 'contents' (Holton 2014a). On the other hand, Klon (Baird 2008) and Kamang (Schapper 2014a) do not use a classifier with fruits at all. Animals are classed with fruits and humans in Adang, but with inanimate (!) objects in Abui.

In sum, numeral classifiers appear to have developed after pAP split up, as no classifier is reconstructable for proto-AP. This is not a surprising finding, as numeral classifier sets are often highly volatile, and typically develop out of other lexical classes, such as nouns. A "spontaneous" innovative development of sets of numeral classifiers is however unusual for a Papuan group, as Papuan languages generally lack classifiersIndeed, classifiers do not occur in any areal and/or genealogical cluster of Papuan languages, except for three areas located in eastern Indonesia where contact between Austronesian and Papuan languages has been long term and intense: Timor-AlorPantar, Halmahera and the Bird's Head of Papua.On the other hand, classifiers are typically found in Austronesian languages, and the Austronesian languages spoken in eastern Indonesia almost universally have themIt is thus plausible that long term Austronesian-Papuan contact has resulted in the diffusion of a numeral classification system into AP languages. In addition, it is likely that recent and intensive contact with Indonesian/Malay (Austronesian) has spiraled the development of the 'general' classifier type in a good number of Alor-Pantar languages as functional copies of the Indonesian general classifier buah. While the Indonesian classifier buah is derived from a noun meaning 'fruit', it has almost lost its semantic content, and functions as a general classifier today

1 The Alor-Pantar languages: Linguistic context, history and typology

Note that the contact leading to the diffusion of numeral classification systems did not involve borrowing of lexemes: no similarity in shape or semantics exists between classifiers in any Alor-Pantar language and any known classifiers of Austronesian languages spoken in the region, nor with classifiers of Indonesian/Malay. In particular, reflexes of the reconstructed proto-Malayo-Polynesian classifier *buaq, which are attested throughout the Austronesian family, are not found as classifiers in the AP languages. Neither has the grammatical structure of Austronesian numeral NPs been copied: in Austronesian NPs, the classifier follows the numeral while the position of the noun varies, thus we find [NumeralClassifier-Noun] (as in Indonesian dua buah rumah ['two CLF house'], 'two houses') but also [Noun-Numeral-Classifier] (as in colloquial Malay rumah dua buah ['house two CLF'];). In contrast, in AP languages, the classifier always precedes the numeral: [Noun-Classifier-Numeral] (as in (32) above).

The AP classifiers thus represent neither borrowed forms nor borrowed structures. What speakers may have adopted from Austronesian, however, is the propensity to reanalyze lexemes which they already had at their disposal (such as 'seed' or 'fruit') and to grammaticalize these as sortal classifiers in numeral expressions.

6.4 Kinship terminology

Kinship terms vary between languages according to ancestor-descendant relationships: the more closely related two languages are, the more likely they are to share cognate forms, and the more likely it is that the meanings of the terms coincide. But as a social construct, kinship practice may be influenced by contact, with concomitant changes in the shape or meaning of the kin terms. The Alor-Pantar languages show enormous variation in kinship terminology and practice, in spite of the fact that many of the communities are closely bound together through ties of marriage alliance (Holton this volume). The westernmost languages distinguish both maternal and paternal cross-cousins (children of opposite-sex siblings) as ideal marriage partners, while at the opposite extreme in the highlands of Alor are found cultures which expressly forbid cross-cousin marriage. Holton (this volume) suggests that the current distribution of kinship terminologies suggests a recent drift toward symmetric exchange systems which distinguish both maternal and paternal cross-cousins, perhaps under the influence of neighboring Austronesian languages.

Marian Klamer

7 Challenges for future research

The twenty or so languages of the Alor-Pantar (AP) family constitute the westmost outlier "Papuan" group, and together with the Papuan languages of Timor, they make up the Timor-Alor-Pantar family. While this connection has been assumed for decades, the chapter by