The fact that these loans can be reconstructed and show regular sound correspondences can be taken as evidence for the claim that the breakup of pAP followed the arrival of AN in the region (perhaps as recently as 3,800-3,000 BP; Spriggs (2011: 511);). However, it is equally likely for later diffusions to exhibit patterns very much like regular sound correspondences. Settling this matter requires independent evidence dating pAP relative to AN.

2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family statistical techniques. Both methods have been applied successfully to questions of wider family relationships but have only recently been used to explore internal relationships of small language families (e.g.). In both the traditional and computational approaches we rely on the prior application of the comparative method to establish cognate classes based on regular sound correspondences. That is, we apply these methods to true cognates rather than lexical look-alikes identified based on subjective similarity judgments.

3.1 Subgrouping based on shared phonological innovations

The sound correspondences which support reconstruction of the pAP consonant inventory allow us to identify sound changes which have occurred in the daughter languages. While there are many changes which are unique to particular languages, we can identify seventeen sound changes which are each shared by at least two languages). Many of these changes are cross-linguistically common, and hence may be of marginal value for subgrouping, for they may have occurred independently in the languages concerned. Additionally, many of the changes cross-cut each other, further complicating internal subgrouping. For example, the change *s > h groups Adang with Blagar and Klon, while the change *r > l groups Adang with Nedebang, Western Pantar, and Abui. This forces a somewhat subjective choice as to which sound change should be given greater weight for the purposes of subgrouping.

The most widespread of these changes is *h > Ø, which occurs in all languages except Teiwa and Western Pantar. However, this change is typologically common and may have occurred independently in several languages. We choose not to base subgrouping on this change. The second most widespread of these changes is *q > k, which occurs in all languages except the Pantar languages Teiwa, Nedebang, and Kaera. This change results in a merger of *k and *q in most daughter languages, while Teiwa, Nedebang, and Kaera keep these phonemes distinct. However, closer examination reveals that Western Pantar also distinguishes reflexes of *k and *q, though not in all positions. Western Pantar, as noted previously, geminates original stops in medial position, with the exception of *q. Thus, in medial position the Western Pantar reflexes of *k and *q are distinguished as k and k, respectively. Using this evidence to support Western Pantar as maintaining the distinction between *k and *q we can then identify a large group of languages which merge these phonemes. The eight languages so identified are precisely the languages of Alor and the Pantar Strait, namely, Blagar, Adang, Klon, Kui, Abui, Kamang, Sawila, and Wersing. We take this change to define a subgroup labeled "Alor. "

Within the Alor group we can distinguish two lower level subgroups. In the east the languages Sawila and Wersing share the innovations *b > p and *s > t. The former change is also shared with Kamang; the latter with Abui. So while it is tempting to expand this group, only Sawila and Wersing share both of these innovations, defining a subgroup we refer to as East Alor. In the west the languages Blagar and Adang share innovations *k > Ø, *g > , and *s > h, defining the Pantar Strait group (labeled "Straits" in the tree). The latter change is also shared with Klon, providing weak support for an intermediate grouping which we label West Alor. The remaining changes cross-cut these and do not provide additional subgrouping information.

The tree based on shared phonological innovations) differs in several ways from previous classifications based on lexicostatistics. In particular, while the eastern languages Sawila and Wersing form a subgroup, they do not constitute primary branches of pAP, as has been suggested in several previous classificationsThis tree has obvious geographic correlates, as shown inbelow. The Alor subgroup defined by the merger of pAP velar and uvular stops includes all of the languages of Alor island and the intervening Pantar Straits. The languages of Pantar, with the exception of Blagar which is spoken on both Pantar and in the Straits, do not subgroup together. Within the Alor group are found two primary subgroups: East Alor at the eastern tip of the island, and West Alor comprising the western tip, the Bird's Head in the Northwest, and the Straits.

3.2 Subgrouping based on lexical characters

A second approach to subgrouping delineates subgroups according to shared cognates. For each lexical correspondence set in our data we partitioned the languages into discrete cognate classes. As with the phonological innovations discussed above, the lexical correspondence sets in our data do not all pick out the same subgroups. That is, the cognate sets delineated by some lexical items overlap with those delineated by other lexical items. These overlapping groupings can be visualized in a split graph which represents the distance between the characters in terms of numbers of splits (