and field work by the author in 2013. Kamang is based on, and the author's field work in 2010 and 2013. Wersing is based on the author's work in 2010 and 2013. Alorese (Austronesian) is based onThe author has conducted primary field work with all languages discussed in this chapter except Blagar, and in all cases the author accepts full responsibility for any errors of fact or interpretation.

Acknowledgments

Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages

Antoinette Schapper

This chapter provides a formal and semantic typology of the highly elaborate spatial deictic systems involving an elevation component found in the Alor-Pantar languages. The systems show a high degree of variation both in the number of paradigms of elevation-marked terms as well as in the number of semantic components within the different elevational domains. The chapter further considers the history and reconstructability of an elevational system to proto-Alor-Pantar, observing that the elevation distinction itself is very stable in the deictic systems of the AP languages, but that the terms of the systems are not always stable and that the systems are often subject to elaboration.

1 Introduction

Elevation in a spatial deictic system is where a referent's location or trajectory is identified as being at a certain elevation relative to the deictic centre (abbreviated as 'dc'). Elevation is a common component of systems of spatial reference in several language areas: it is pervasive in the Tibeto-Burman) and New Guinea) areas, and less common but recurrent in pockets of the Americas (e.g., UtoAztecan languages such as Guarjío, Miller 1996), Australia (e.g.,and the Caucasus (e.g., East Caucasian languages,). In the typological and descriptive literature, many terms have been used to describe elevation components in spatial deictic systems, including: "environmental space deixis" (Bickel 2001), "altitudinal case markers" (Ebert 2003), "height" (Dixon 2003), "vertical case"), "spatial coordinate systems", and "topographical deixis" (Post 2011).

In this chapter I further the typological study of spatial deictic systems with an elevation component by surveying the elevation-expressing terms in AlorPantar (AP) languages. Every AP language possesses elevation-expressing terms in at least two domains: (i) set of motion verbs (labelled here "elevational motion verbs") expressing that a trajectory is at a certain elevation relative to the deictic centre (go up, come down, go across, etc.), and (ii) set of non-verbal items (generically referred to here as "elevationals") expressing that a location is at a certain elevation relative to the deictic centre. The synchronic part of this chapter focuses on the use and function of the second of these sets and any additional elevational sets a language might have. These items show much morphosyntactic variation, in contrast to elevational verbs which have near-identical distributions across the AP languages. 1 I further consider the history and reconstructability of an elevational system to proto-Alor-Pantar, observing that the elevation distinction itself is very stable in the deictic systems of the AP languages, but that the terms of the systems are not always stable and that the systems are often subject to elaboration.

The chapter is structured as follows. In § 2, I set out the terminology and conventions that I will use in describing the elevational systems. In § 3, I describe the elevational systems of seven AP languages. For each language I discuss the number of elevation terms in the system, both within and across paradigms which contain elevation-marked terms. I highlight the variation that exists in the elaboration of the systems as well as in the morpho-syntactic behaviour of the items in the individual systems. In § 4, I turn to the history of AP elevational systems. Using data from eleven AP languages, I reconstruct the proto-AP elevational system and look at how different languages have expanded and complicated the inherited system. § 5 concludes the discussion and considers briefly the potential typological significance of AP elevational systems. All data is cited in a unified transcription in order to avoid confusion due to different orthographic practices for different languages. The sources for the data cited are given throughout the text of the chapter, but are also summarized in the 'Sources' section before the References.

2 Terminological preliminaries

The various labels that we saw in the previous section are indicative of the lack of standardized terminology to describe deictic systems with an elevational com-6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages ponent. In this section, I define the terminology for the different categories we encounter to be used throughout this chapter.

Of primary importance are the labels given to elevational heights. I distinguish three heights of elevation in basic glosses, as set out in (1). I avoid terms such as "below", "above", etc. as used by other authors, since these are typically relational terms whose locative reference does not hinge on a speech participant (speaker and/or addressee). For instance, in the sentence The cat is below the chair, the position of speech participants does not have any impact on the locative relation between the cat and the chair.