First, in choice of numeral base: in all systems both quinary ('base-five') and decimal ('base-ten') bases are used.includes examples of numerals with a quinary base (yes in Teiwa, yawaten in Kula). A decimal base is used in numerals 'ten' and above; an illustration is Teiwa qaar in qaar nuk 'ten' and qaar raq 'twenty'.

Second, the type of operations invoked for the interpretation of the morphemes that make up the compound numerals vary between addition (Abui yeting buti 'nine'< yeting 'five' + buti 'four'), subtraction (Adang ti i nu 'nine' < ti i (semantically opaque), nu 'one' < 'minus one') and multiplication (Western Pantar ke atiga 'thirty' < ke 'ten' x atiga 'three'). Of these, subtraction is the least frequent.

Third, different types of operations are involved in the derivation of cardinals: typically they involve simple juxtaposition of bases (e.g., Abui kar nuku 'ten' < kar 'ten', nuku 'one'), but in some cases, a lexeme is added that expresses the operation (e.g., the operator wal signifying addition in numerals 11-19, e.g., Abui kar nuku wal nuku 'eleven'.

The number compounds in AP languages are all exocentric, that is, they lack a morphological head. In this respect they contrast with nominal compounds, which are typically endocentric (e.g., Teiwa xam yir 'milk' < xam 'breast', yir 'water', where the rightmost element is the head). As both nominal and numeral compounds have stress on their final member, we can analyse both types of compounds as prosodically right-headed across the board in Alor-Pantar.

In the Pantar languages in particular, the synchronic morphological make-up of numeral compounds can be rather obscure. For instance, Teiwa yesnerig 'eight' is not a transparent compound of synchronic yusan 'five' + yerig 'three'. In contrast, the languages of Central and East Alor have more transparent numeral compounds, for instance Abui yetingsua 'eight' < yeting 'five' + sua 'three'. Phonologically, however, in all the languages of the sample discussed here, we can still recognize compound forms because they consist of two stressed phonological words, the second of which has primary stress. (We return to this issue in ยง 2.3.2 below.)

We have not attested an AP language with a number word for 'null' or 'zero'. The absence of entities is rather expressed predicatively, using a word meaning '(be) empty', such as Teiwa hasak in (1). 1 In the Teiwa idioms in (1), a subject precedes a nominal predicate that is headed by the place pronoun i 'it.(place)', so that absent entities are expressed as "X is (an) empty place(s)", compare (

In sum, AP languages have up to six morphologically simple cardinals; in all AP languages, the non-borrowed cardinals 'seven' and up are morphologically complex. Most cardinals are compounds, consisting of two or more morphemes in apposition, the second of which gets word stress. The definition of the morphological structure of these compounds varies along three dimensions: the choice of base, the arithmetic operations invoked for the interpretation of the cardinals that make up the numeral, and the ways in which these arithmetic operations are expressed.

2.2 Ordinal numerals

Ordinal numerals are words that identify the position that a given member of a set occupies relative to other members of the same set (e.g., 'the third dog'). The main function of ordinal numerals is thus to indicate the position of an entity in an ordered sequence.

All AP languages have distinct forms for cardinal and ordinal numerals, and all of them have ordinal numbers associated with any cardinal from 'two' and above. Ordinals in AP languages are derived from cardinals, which is a crosslinguistically common patternVariation exists only in the expression of 'first', which in some of the languages is unrelated to the numeral 'one', as discussed below.

The derivation of ordinals involves a third person possessive pronoun or prefix at the left periphery of the cardinal numeral. The ordered entity functions grammatically as the possessor of the cardinal number. For example, Kamang dum yeok 'child 3.poss-two', lit. 'child its-two' > 'second child'.

Within the ordinal possessive constructions, three areal patterns are discernible. The first pattern is that of the languages of Pantar and the Straits, where the possessive ordinal construction includes an additional element specific for ordinals. The second pattern is found in Central-East Alor, where ordinals are also expressed like possessive constructions, but without including an additional ordinal element. The third pattern is found in Kula and Sawila in East Alor, where the ordinals involve an applicative verb. We discuss the three patterns in turn.