A woman's family may be additionally distinguished via the use of a second genitive pronominal prefix paradigm. In addition to the usual possessive paradigm with the back o vowel grade, Adang distinguishes a second paradigm referred to as "contrastive" (Haan 2001) which employs a front vowel grade. A male ego may use the contrastive paradigm to refer to the children of his wife's siblings, e.g., ne'ai 'my wife's sibling's child' (WZC, WBC). This term is only used by men; there is no corresponding term by which women can distinguish 207 Gary Holton

Affines in ego's generation are denoted by the term-afeng, a term which essentially means 'other' (cf. Abui afenga). Included in this category are the spouses of one's siblings, as well as one's spouse's siblings and their spouses. No special terms for affines in ascending and descending generations have been documented. Instead, ascending and descending affines are referred to by the same parent and child terminology used for consanguinal (biological) relations.

208 5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

The second ascending generation above ego is denoted bap 'grandparent', while more distant ascending generations are denoted bap turtur 'ancestors'. One's child or one's sibling is denoted 'ai, while the second descending generation below ego is denoted by di'ing 'grandchild'. These terms can be further specified for gender with ob 'female' or lote 'male'.

Abui resembles Adang in having two primary terminologies for ego's generation, neither of which distinguishes between biological siblings and (parallel or cross) cousins. The first set of terminology is age-based and distinguishes-naana 'older sibling/cousin' from-kokda (or-nahaa) 'younger sibling/cousin'. 3 Gender is not distinguished. A second terminology is gender-based and distinguishes-moknehi 'same-sex sibling/cousin' from-ura 'opposite-sex sibling/cousin'. The choice between the two terminologies is pragmatically based and has nothing to do with the distinction between siblings and cousins. The gender-based terminology is more appropriate for older ages, whereas the age-based terminology is more appropriate for young children. The same-sex term-moknehi can also be used with broader semantics as a term of address even for those who are not immediate kin (

An additional layer of terminology for ego's generation distinguishes crosscousins via the terms neng fala 'mother's brother's child' and mayol fala 'father's sister's child'. These terms can be used as vocatives without a possessive prefix, or they may be possessed to describe the relationship, e.g., neneng fala 'my mother's brother's child'. In this sense they contrast with Adang ob ai/lote ai, which cannot be used as vocatives. The terms neng fala and mayol fala are also reciprocals of each other, so that ego's neng fala calls ego mayol fala. These terms are derived from the words for 'man' and 'woman', plus fala 'house'. Descendants of one's neng fala are referred to as kalieta fala, literally 'elder house', while descendants of one's mayol fala are referred to as wiil fala, literally 'child house'.The relationship between descendants of opposite-sex siblings is diagrammed inThe referents labeled A and B are children of opposite-sex siblings,Nicolspeyer (1940: 56) lists nahaa rather than kokda as the term for 'younger sibling', while both terms appear inMy consultants prefer the latter term.The Takalelang variety of Abui described here differs from the Atimelang variety described byRather than the terms wiil fala and kalieta fala, in Atimelang one finds kokda fala and feng fala, respectively. These terms are semantically similar: wiil 'child' vs. kokda 'younger'; and kalieta 'old' vs. feng 'elder'. However, Nicolspeyer indicates that the Atimelang terms kokda fala and feng fala are used to refer to the descendants of one's parents' younger and elder siblings, respectively (1940: 46).

Gary Holton

n a a n a /-k o k d a (-m o k n e h i )-n a a n a /-k o k d a (-u r a )-n a a n a /-k o k d a (-m o k n e h i )-n a a n a /-k o k d a

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages that is, cross-cousins. A calls B mayol fala, literally 'female house', while B calls A neng fala, literally 'male house'. The children of A refer to the children of B as wiil fala, literally 'child house', while the children of B refer to the children of A as kalieta fala, literally 'elder house'. These terms do not depend on the gender of the referent but rather on the genders of the respective siblings from which they descend. C belongs to the male side and is thus the elder house; D belongs to the female side and is thus the younger house. These terms can be used across generations as well, so that A may refer to D as either wiil fala or mayol fala; and D may refer to A as either kalieta fala or neng fala.