The syntax of elevation-marked terms also shows variation between languages. Focusing on the elevationals (or "elevated locationals", items referring to a loca

Antoinette Schapper

tion at a specified elevation), we observed a range of syntactic differences from one language to the next. In, I summarize the ability of AP elevationals to occur predicatively, adverbially and within the NP.

In all but two languages (Kamang and Blagar), elevationals occur as independent clausal predicates indicating the elevation at which the subject was to be located. Blagar does not allow elevationals predicatively, and instead has a derived paradigm of stative elevational verbs which fulfill the same function as predicative elevationals in other AP languages.

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages All languages allow their elevationals to occur clause-medially, when adverbial. However, only four languages (Teiwa, Blagar, Western Pantar and Kamang) allow elevationals to occur clause-finally. Yet, even where the clausal position was the same, there were, differences from language to language in the function and constituency of elevationals in adverbial use. The most common clausemedial function of an elevational was to mark that the situation or event denoted by the following predicate took place at a certain elevation. This was found for Wersing, Teiwa, Abui, Adang and Kamang clause-medial adverbial elevationals, but not in Blagar and Western Pantar. In Blagar the choice of clausal position of an elevational reflected not spatial but epistemic differences, with clause-medial position signalling certainty on the part of the speaker and clause-final position signalling epistemic accessibility of knowledge of the event to the addressee. In Kamang, by contrast, the clausal position of an elevational reflects a different kind of location: clause-medially an elevational denotes the location at which the following predicate take places, whereas clause-finally an elevational denotes a location resulting from the predicate. In Western Pantar, making a clause-final versus clause-medial distinction is misleading because the constituency of an elevational is the same in both positions: Western Pantar elevationals follow the element whose location they denote, medially these are NPs and finally these are verbs.

In the nominal domain, we also observed variation in how individual languages could use elevationals. All but Abui and Adang did not allow elevationals to occur in the NP. Abui allowed elevationals not only to occur within an NP alongside a head noun, but also to head the NP itself, while Adang only allowed elevationals to occur within a head noun.

In short, elevation marking in AP languages is characterized by diversity not only in the sheer number of terms that systems contain, but also in the semantic components and syntactic behaviour of those terms.

4 History of AP elevation terms

Thus far our explorations of AP elevational systems have been synchronic, describing the internal structures of the systems one language at a time. Today, even if the majority of elevational systems in AP languages are little explored, the quantity and quality of existing information is sufficient for the formulation of historical hypotheses about the elevational system of their common ancestor, proto-AP (pAP).

Antoinette Schapper, I present the reconstructable elevational forms of pAP. These reconstructions are made by comparing the terms in the systems found in modern AP languages. The one peculiarity of this reconstructed system is that the low elevational domain has two competing reconstructions in the elevational particles (*po versus *yo) and in the elevational verbs denoting motion towards the dc (*seri versus *ya()). The evidence for these will be discussed in subsequent sections.

In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, I look at the evidence for the different forms in the reconstructed proto-paradigms of elevationals and elevational verbs respectively. Finally, in ยง 4.3, I consider the mechanisms by which the proto-system has been complicated and additional distinctions have been built up. In the following subsections, I draw on data not only from the seven languages already discussed in ยง 3, but also from an additional four languages, Kaera, Klon, Kui, and Sawila. In these languages, individual basic elevation terms are known but the semantics and morpho-syntax of the elevation system are not fully understood or described.4.1 Proto-elevationals

Antoinette Schapper

Reflexes of all four morphemes are found in non-contiguous areas of both Alor and Pantar. The distribution also does not conform to any known subgroups of the AP languages, thus justifying the reconstruction of the four morphemes to the highest level, pAP.

We see fromthat "bare", that is unaffixed, reflexes of the proto-elevationals are found in Western Pantar, Kaera and Blagar. In West Pantar, Blagar and Adang, these morphemes are found across multiple paradigms of different word classes. Notably, several modern AP languages have reflexes suffixed with a nasal segment. This, I suggest, traces back to an enclitic postposition, pAP *= 'loc'.Abui reflects the proto-morpheme as = 'loc' (see example 11), an enclitic postposition closely resembling the probable original function of *=. In other AP languages, *= is preserved fused onto a range of location-signifying words. Many AP languages have postpositions marked with *=, for instance: on Blagar ta 'on top of', but not on Kamang taa and Abui taha, or on Wersing ming 'in', but not on Kamang mi, Klon mi and many more < *mi 'in(side)'.