3 History of research on the Alor and Pantar languages

Initial anthropological and linguistic work on Alor was carried out by Du Bois, both working in the Abui area in central Alor., research based at Leiden University resulted in a number of publications on Alor and Pantar languages.is a 100item word list of 17 Alor-Pantar varieties. Stokhof published language materials on Kamang, which he referred to asand on KabolaPublications on Blagar are byOutside of Leiden, Donohue published an article on, and the Badan (or Pusat) Pengembangan dan Pembinaan Bahasa ('Centre for Language Development and Construction') based in Jakarta, produced some survey work on the languages of AlorA grammar of Adang was completed by a native 8 1 The Alor-Pantar languages: Linguistic context, history and typology speaker of the language, research took place in Pantar and the western part of Alor, through a project at Leiden University that was funded with a grant from the Netherlands Organisation of Scientific Research.Results of this project include work on Klon, Kafoa (Baird to appear),) and AloreseAt the same time, Gary Holton from the University of Alaska Fairbanks, documented Western Pantar, with funding from the US National Science Foundation, the US National Endowment for the Humanities, and the Endangered Language Documentation Programme.

In 2009, a fund from the European Science Foundation enabled a further research project on Alor-Pantar languages, now involving a group of seven researchers from the University of Alaska Fairbanks, the University of Surrey, and Leiden University. The chapters in the present volume all report on research carried out between 2009-2013 as part of this latest project.

4 History of Alor and Pantar languages and their speakers

4.1 Prehistory

The Papuan languages of Alor and Pantar all belong to a single genaealogical grouping or family (), which spread over the two islands several millennia ago. Together with the Papuan languages of Timor (cf. Table 2 above) the Alor Pantar (AP) languages (cf.above) form the Timor Alor Pantar (TAP) familyWhenever this volume refers to the Alor-Pantar family, it must be kept in mind that this family is a subgroup of the TAP family.

One hypothesis holds that the Timor-Alor-Pantar family is a sub-branch of the Trans-New Guinea family. That is, it ultimately descends from immigrants from the New Guinea highlands who arrived in the Lesser Sundas 4,500-4,000 Before Present (BP)). However, recent historical comparative research) shows little lexical evidence to support an affiliation with the

Marian Klamer

Trans New-Guinea languages (cf.

Another hypothesis holds that the Papuans in the Lesser Sundas descend from arrivals 20,000 BPWhile this possibility cannot be excluded, the level of lexical and grammatical similarity in the AP family does not support an age of more than several millennia, and the reconstructed vocabulary of proto-AP appears to contain Austronesian loan words such as 'betel nut' (Ancient Austronesian loans found across the Alor-Pantar family following regular sound changes suggest that the AP family split up after being in contact with the Austronesian languages in the area. As the Austronesians are commonly assumed to have arrived in the area 3,000 BP), this would give the Alor-Pantar family a maximum age of 3,000 years.

As yet, no archeological data on the Alor-Pantar archipelago is available. Archaeological research in Indonesia has been largely determined by the aim to trace the Austronesian dispersal through the archipelago, with a focus on the western islands Borneo, Sulawesi and JavaWhat archeological evidence we have on the Lesser Sunda islands relates to large islands such as Flores and Timor, and it suggests that the large islands were settled by Austronesians prior to smaller and more isolated islands such as Pantar and Alor.

Archaeological and anthropological studies in East Timorshow that the chronology of Papuan and Austronesian influence can differ by location, and that populations that now speak a Papuan language may have been Austronesian originally. Similarly, Austronesian languages may have been adopted by originally Papuan speakers.

Human genetic studies support a connection between populations of the Lesser Sundas with Papuan populations of New Guinea and Austronesians from Asia (). The Papuan (or "Melanesian"-)Asian admixture is estimated to have begun about 5,000 years BP in the western part of eastern Indonesia, decreasing to 3,000 years BP in the eastern part. This associates the Papuan-Asian admixture with Austronesian expansion (). Debate is ongoing on the importance and details of the Austronesian expansion in Island Southeast Asia, but consensus exists that eastern Indonesia shows a "complex migration history" (1 The Alor-Pantar languages: Linguistic context, history and typology

4.2 Historical records on Alor and Pantar

To date, few if any records exist on the history of the Papuan groups of Alor and Pantar.Most of the written historical records refer to the large neighboring islands ofto contacts between groups on Flores and Timor on the one hand, and the coastal populations of Pantar and Alor on the other