Bal marung 'ball pl' in (7) refers to an unspecified number of balls. This can be a small number of balls, say two or three; it does not have to be a large number of balls.

5 Typological perspectives on plural words in AP languages

We saw in ยง 1 that a good deal of what was known of the typology of plural words is due to Matthew Dryer's work, in particularand to a lesser extentDryer (2011) documents the use of plural words in the coding of nominal plurality. In doing so, Dryer wanted to prove the existence of a phenomenon that was not generally recognized, and his definitions reflect that. As mentioned in ยง 1, for Dryer, to be a plural word an item must be the prime indicator of plurality, and in the pure case they have this as their unique function. Based on this constrained characterization, Dryer shows that plural words nevertheless show considerable diversity. First, while being by definition non-affixal, they vary according to their degree of phonological independence. Second, they show great variety in the word class to which they belong; they may be integrated (to a greater or lesser degree) into another class, or form a unique class. The examples from the Alor-Pantar languages show vividly the variety of plural words in this regard: in all of them, plural words form a unique class on their own, which is however integrated into another class-but which class is variable across the languages. For instance, in Teiwa, the plural word is part of the noun phrase and behaves largely like a nominal quantifier, while in Kamang, rather than actually being part of the noun phrase, the plural word distributes as a noun phrase itself.

Third, plural words may have different values. In this respect they are perhaps poorly named.suggests that "grammatical number words" would be a better term, since he gives instances of singular words and dual words. This is an area where Alor-Pantar languages indicate how the typology can be 397 Marian Klamer, Antoinette Schapper & Greville Corbett taken forward. When we look at the full range of "ordinary" number values, those associated with affixal morphology, we distinguish 'determinate' and 'indeterminate' number valuesDeterminate number values are those where only one form is appropriate, given the speaker's knowledge of the real world. If a language has an obligatory dual, for instance, this would be a determinate number value since to refer to two distinct entities this would be the required choice. However, values such as paucal or greater plural are not like this; there is an additional element to the choice. We find this same distinction in the Alor-Pantar number words: for instance, Teiwa non signals not just plurality but has the connotation of abundance (like the greater plural).

Fourth, a key part of the typology of number systems is the items to which the values can apply. Two systems may be alike in their values (say both have singular and plural) but may differ dramatically in that in one language almost all nominals have singular and plural available, while in the other plurality may be restricted to a small (top) segment of the Animacy Hierarchy. The data from Alor-Pantar languages are important in showing how this type of differentiation applies also with number words. With affixal number, we find instances of recategorization; these are found particularly where a mass noun is recategorized as a count noun, and then has singular and plural available. We see this equally in Alor-Pantar languages such as Kamang where nung is used with ili 'water', when recategorized as a count noun.

Furthermore, number words are not restricted to appearing with nouns. In Abui, plural loku can occur with a third person pronoun; hel is the third singular pronoun, which can be pluralized by loku. While this is of great interest, other languages go further. A fine example is Miskitu, a Misumalpan language of Nicaragua and Honduras. Number is marked by number words (Green ms. Andrew Koontz-Garboden, p.c.), singular (kum) and plural (nani). Pronouns take the plural word, rather like nouns:

This example, like all those cited above from Alor-Pantar languages, helps to extend the typology of number words; as we gather a fuller picture, the typology of number words becomes increasingly like that of affixal number.

9 Plural number words in the Alor-Pantar languages

6 Conclusions

Proto-Alor-Pantar had a plural word of the shape *non. Some daughter languages inherited this form, others innovated one or more plural words. In none of the five AP languages investigated here do restrictions apply on the type of referents that can be pluralized with the plural word, and all of them prohibit a combination of the plural word and a numeral in a single constituent.

The syntax of the plural word varies. In each language investigated here the word constitutes a class of its own. In Western Pantar, the plural word shares much with adjectival quantifiers and numerical expressions, in Teiwa it patterns mostly with non-numeral quantifiers, and in Kamang, Abui and Wersing plural words function very much like nouns. The plural words in the five languages behave differently, so that it is not possible to establish a category of plural word that is cross-linguistically uniform.