The single Austronesian language, Alorese, clearly has a more recent origin and today occupies only a few coastal outposts in the archipelagoEarly reports noted a clear cultural distinction between the "non-indigenous" coastal Alorese speakers and the "indigenous" mountain populations of). The non-Austronesian character of the languages (as opposed to the cultures) was first recognized for Oirata, a language spoken on Kisar Island, just east of Timor de Josselin de, and shortly thereafter a connection was made to Abui, a language of Alor (Nicolspeyer 1940). The first evidence for the genealogical unity of the AP languages is found in, who compiled 117-item comparative wordlists for 34 language varieties. Stokhof proposed a preliminary lexicostatistical classification based on similarity judgments applied to these lexical data, emphasizing that this classification should be consideredemployed a much larger lexical dataset to identify regular sound correspondences and establish a reconstruction of pAP using the comparative method.

While the results of the comparative method definitively show that the AP languages form a genealogical unit, the identified phonological innovations are typologically common and do not delineate neat subgroups. After reviewing the subgrouping implications of the phonological innovations, we apply computational methods to the same data and are on this basis able to identify internal groupings. Crucially, the lexical data are coded for cognacy based on identified phonological innovations. The resulting tree of AP languages is consistent with an historical scenario whereby AP languages originate in the Pantar Strait. We begin in the following section by reviewing the recent reconstruction of pAP. 2We exclude here the Austronesian language Sama-Bajo, which is spoken by recent migrants in a single community on the coast of northern Pantar.The data and reconstructions in ยง 2 and in the Appendix largely follow, except in the following ways. First, we have followedin correcting some minor typos. Some of these corrections result in changes to our analyses as well. For example, retranscription of Teiwa kiin 'mosquito' leads us to reconstruct *kin rather than *qin. Second, while the data inare primarily phonetic, here we have tried to use phonological forms where they are known. Third, we have used different dialects of Adang and Blagar (Pitungbang and Dolabang dialects, respectively) to more closely match existing publications for those languages (e.g., the sketch grammars in). Fourth, we have consulted new evidence from Timor languages (see Chapter 3) to add new reconstructions or to update the pAP reconstructions based on external evidence. That new evidence has caused us to question the reconstructability of *b and *d in final position, as discussed below. Finally, we have removed pAP reconstructions for 'axe' and 'comb' because we now have evidence that these may be Austronesian loanwords that postdate the breakup of pAP.

2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family

2 Sound correspondences and reconstruction

The surge in documentary field work over the past decade (see Chapter 1) has provided a robust lexical dataset on which to base the reconstruction of pAP. The primary data source used in this chapter is a set of 400-item vocabulary lists collected for twelve different language varieties with broad geographic representation across the archipelago: Teiwa (Tw), Nedebang (Nd), Kaera (Ke), Western Pantar (WP), Blagar (Bl), Adang (Ad), Klon (Kl), Kui (Ki), Abui (Ab), Kamang (Km), Sawila (Sw), and Wersing (We). (Seein Chapter 1.) The vocabulary list was tailored specifically to this task, taking into account three specific goals. First, the list contains basic vocabulary such as that found on a Swadesh list, tailored to include items relevant to the East Nusantara cultural and ecological region. Second, the list includes some non-basic vocabulary which may be diagnostic of shared cultural traits. For example, it includes a number of terms relating to agriculture. Our ability or inability to reconstruct these terms provides insight into the culture history of the pAP speakers and thus sheds light on AP prehistory and migration. Third, the list includes items motivated by a need to find further examples of specific sound correspondences, such as 'village' and 'crocodile', which both contain pharyngeal fricatives in Teiwa. These lists were supplemented by data from published sources and from ongoing field work by members of the EuroBABEL project. In some cases, the data present uncertainties regarding the phonemic status of particular segments, orthographic conventions, and morpheme boundaries. For example, in elicited word lists, verbs can occur with yet unanalyzed aspectual and/or modal suffixes. In this paper we only compare root forms, with affixes being identified on the basis of grammatical descriptions and recurrent endings within the lexical data. In the cognate sets presented here, material identified as fused or fossilized morphology is bracketed with '( )', while roots that obligatorily occur with affixes are marked with a hyphen, '-'. Identification of regular consonant correspondences supports the reconstruction of a pAP inventory containing 14 consonants, as shown inEach of these consonant reconstructions is supported by correspondence sets for each position (initial, medial, and final) in which that consonant occurs.