, this form must be considered older than the quinary numeral for 'six'. In other words, where we find [5 1] 'six', this is viewed as a later extension of the quinary system that was already in use for 'seven' through 'nine' in proto-AP.A second point of typological interest are the subtractive decimal systems used in the Straits-West-Alor languages, where numerals 'seven' through 'nine' are formed by subtraction, 17 while 'six' is monomorphemic. Systems like this, where subtraction is used in the formation of more than one numeral, and where such subtractive forms occur alongside a monomorphemic form for 'six', are crosslinguistically uncommon.

7.2 AP numerals in their areal context

It is useful to complement the genealogical perspective of sections 4 to 6 with an areal perspective, and compare the numeral system patterns in the AP languages with those of the Austronesian languages in their immediate vicinity, to see what this might tell us about the history of AP numerals. Where similar forms or patterns are found, we may ask whether there is evidence that these are contact-induced. In this section, we look at the evidence that may suggest influence from AP languages into nearby Austronesian languages, followed by

It is a well-established fact that proto-Austronesian (pAN) had a decimal system, with numerals 'one' through 'nine' all being simple mono-morphemic words.claims that outside of Melanesia few Austronesian languages have innovated complex-additive, subtractive or multiplicative-numerals for 'one' to 'ten'. The Austronesian languages around AP, however, show a notable clustering of just such innovations. We compiled numeral data for 32 Austronesian languages spoken west and south-east of Alor and Pantar (seeIn these, we observe three distinct patterns of innovations in the formation of numerals 'six' through 'nine', reflected in nine modern Austronesian languagesThese are: the Timor pattern (1-5, 5+1, 5+2, 5+3, 5+4, 10), the Lembata pattern (1-7, 4x2, 5+4, 10), and the Flores pattern (1-5, 5+1, 5+2, 2x4, 10-1, 10). Proto-Austronesian numerals are provided for comparative purposes in the top row.

7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages

Innovative quinary numerals are found in the Austronesian languages across the three innovative types. In the north-central Timor languages, Tokodede and Mambae, we have quinary numerals for numerals from 'six' through 'nine', a pattern that stands out against the typically conservative numerals systems of the Austronesian languages elsewhere on Timor (Naueti being an exception, seeon the possible reasons for the quinary numerals in Naueti). It is notable that the close inland relative of Tokodede and Mambae, Kemak, has no base-5 numerals (seeThe appearance of this pattern in these languages may be a result of contact with speakers of AP languages spoken on the south and east coast of Alor, such as Kula, Sawila and Wersing, located just a short sea crossing from the north of Timor. There is some linguistic evidence that contacts between these Alor groups and those of north-central Timor existed: the additive operators in the central-east Alor languages Sawila, Kula and Wersing (see) seem to be borrowed from Tokodede ( § 6.2). In addition, oral traditions record contacts between groups in south-east Alor and north Timor. For instance, eastern Alor groups almost invariably trace their origins to pre-historic migrations from Timor). Similarly, many songs in central-east Alor are sung in the Tokodede language and mention place names such asAntoinette Schapper & Marian Klamer

7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages which are located in the north of Timor in the area where Tokodede is spokenHowever, asargue, the directionality of the influence in the contact relations retrievable from such oral traditions and linguistic evidence is firmly flowing from Timor to Alor. The borrowing of quinary numerals from AP into Timor languages thus would appear to go against the other borrowing patterns, including that seen thus far in numerals. As such, whilst Alorese quinary numerals are the only such systems that are in contact with the Tokodede and Mambae and seem the best candidate for the innovative numeral formation, it remains to be explained why this pattern was able to spread to the Timor languages, when in oral traditions and language it is the Timor groups that are the source of influence on Alor and not a recipient of it.

The origin of the base-five numerals in the central-eastern Flores languages Rongga, Ende, Ngadha, Nage, Kéo, and Lio is yet more obscure. There is mounting evidence of a non-Austronesian substrate in the Austronesian languages of the Flores region (see, e.g.,). Accordingly, we may hypothesize that the quinary forms of the Flores languages reflect a prehistoric Papuan (or non-Austronesian) substrate that had a quinary system for the lower cardinals. However, we currently lack any evidence to link the languages forming the substrate in the central-eastern Flores region to the AP languages as we know it today-the Flores substrate could just as well be part of a different nonAustronesian group.