), plus the two unelevated speech participant-anchored locationals, iga 'prox.spkr' and ina 'dist.spkr'. Specific-marked forms of locationals and demonstratives are derived by means of s-prefixed onto the basic locationals (28). Demonstratives are derived from the elevationals by-gu for the visible paradigm and-m(e) for the non-visible paradigm

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages

Within the clause, elevationals follow the element whose location they denote, and thus may appear clause-medially or-finally. For instance, in (31) the low elevational pau follows the subject eu 'girl' and denotes the location of her at the time of calling. In (32) pau denotes the location of the object habba 'village' which it follows, while in (33) mau denotes the location of the pre-subject locative adjunct habba 'village' which it follows.

Elevationals in clause-final position indicate the location at which the preceding predicate takes place. For instance, final pau in (34) denotes that the event of teri 'anchoring' is at lower elevation than the deictic centre. Similarly, infinal dau signals that the motion denoted by mia 'go.high.steep' is higher in elevation than the deictic centre.

Kamang elevation terms are given inThe Kamang elevational paradigms have more terms than most AP languages due to the presence of two additional semantic components in the high and low domains, namely, direction and distance. Direction has to do with the angle of the path taken or referenced location relative to the angle of the slope. Using a direct elevation term means that the path taken follows the angle of the slope directly (i.e., at its steepest), whilst an indirect elevation term means that the path traverses across the angle of the slope or that the referenced location is off to the side of angle of the slope. Distance is only marked in the indirect domain, and is concerned with whether the path taken is short or long or the referenced location is near or far. Thus, using a near elevation term means traversing across a slope for a short distance, while using a far one means traversing across a slope for a long distance.

Kamang elevationals occur adverbially, directly before a predicate or a predicate and its object. For instance, in (36) mutu denotes the location from which 257 Antoinette Schapper the calling takes place, and in (37) tu gives the location on the slope where the stumbling takes place. An elevational may also occur following a motion verb specifying the resultant location of the motion, as inwhere the elevational tu follows its corresponding elevational verb te.

3.8 Summary

AP languages invariably have elevation marking in a set of non-verbal elevationals and in a paradigm of elevational verbs. In the preceding sections, we have seen some of the variety that elevational systems contain. AP languages vary significantly in the number of elevation terms, the number of paradigms over which they occur and the extra semantic components that are added within the three elevational heights (summarized in

Minimally, AP languages have 9 elevation terms, with three elevationals and six elevational motion verbs distinguishing three elevations. A much higher number of terms are found in languages such as Blagar, Adang and Western Pantar, which have elevation marking morphology reiterated over multiple paradigms of different word classes, including in particular demonstratives (one extra paradigm in Adang, two in Blagar and four in Western Pantar), verbs (six extra paradigms in Blagar) and adverbs (one extra paradigm in Blagar).

The number of elevation-marked terms has also been increased by adding semantic distinctions within the three elevational heights. Adang has the greatest number of semantic elaborations, with geophysical, vertical and directional terms being added in the elevationals to the standard global elevationals. Kamang 258 6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages

adds two new semantic components to its elevation-marked terms, directionality and distance. Western Pantar and Abui add one extra semantic distinction, steepness and distance respectively. Added semantic components are typically limited to either particular elevational domains or to particular paradigms of elevation-marked terms.presents an overview of the distribution of these across AP languages. A cell with '1' represents a domain without semantic elaboration, whilst higher numerals (bolded) indicate the presence of semantic elaborations.

We see that it is not typical to elaborate in the level domain. Only Adang has more than one level term in its elevationals, due to the regular derivation of directional elevationals from elevation-marked verbs (fal < fa 'go.level', mal < ma 'come.level'). All other languages restrict their elaborations to the high and low domains. Semantic elaborations are typically also limited to one paradigm and are not elaborated over all paradigms. Abui and Adang limit their extra distinctions to elevationals, while Western Pantar limits it to elevational motion verbs denoting movement away from the dc. Kamang is unusual in that it has almost the same semantic elaborations in both its elevationals and elevational verbs. Asymmetries in the number of extra distinctions are present in Adang and Kamang, while Abui and Western Pantar apply the semantic elaboration to all parts of the paradigm.