, while 'eight' has become a base-four compoundIn Western Pantar, on the other hand, the proto-Straits-West-Alor subtractive numeral 'nine' has been replaced by an innovative, but still subtractive form composed of the numeral 'one' denoting the subtrahend and the lexical verb 'take away'. Western Pantar 'seven' and 'eight' involve a borrowed and reanalysed quinary base.

6 Numerals 'ten' and above 6.1 Numeral 'ten': multiplied base-ten compoundpresents the numerals 10, 20 and 30. A decimal base *qar 'ten' is reconstructable to proto-Alor-Pantar. This is reflected across AP languages, with the exception of central-eastern Alor, where languages eastwards of Kamang reflect innovative proto-Central-East-Alor (pCEA) *adajaku 'ten'. This form indicates that a quinary base may have at some point replaced the decimal base in these languages: the second element of the compound *adajaku 'ten' is homophonous with *jaku '2' so that it appears to be composed as [

In the modern AP languages, reflexes of *qar for the most part do not stand alone but must be combined with another numeral in order to signify. Decades (numerals denoting a set or series of ten such as) in AP languages are typically formed by combining the decimal base with a multiplicand indicating the decade. Thus, 'ten' is composed of a reflex of *qar and 'one' [10 1], 'twenty' of 'ten' and 'two' [10 2], 'thirty' of 'ten' and 'three', and so on for higher decades.

In the east of Alor we find deviations from this majority pattern for forming decades.

In the east of Alor, prefix mi-occurs on multiplicands to denote decades 'twenty' and above. This appears an extension of how mi-derives frequency verbs and ordinals from cardinals. In other words, the construction used to express higher decades in eastern Alor languages can be paraphrased as 'ten twice' for 'twenty', 'ten thrice' for 'thirty', and so on. In Kula, the use of mi-in the decade construction has conventionalized to such an extent that adajakwu 'ten' can be left off entirely, with the prefixed multiplicand carrying the decade meaning alone. That is, mi-jakwu for instance, would etymologically denote 'twice' or 'second', but is now used alone to mean 'twenty'.

6.2 Numerals within decades

A 'decade' is a numeral which is a set or series of ten (e.g.,). The term 'numeral within decades' is used here to refer to any numeral expression such as 'eighteen', 'eighty-nine' etc., involving an operator word that signifies addition.In AP languages, an additive operator separates the decades from the numerals 'one' to 'nine', as illustrated in

The additive operator is not used to combine decades, hundreds or thousands with each other, as illustrated with '1999' in several languages in (12).

7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages

7 Alor-Pantar numerals from a typological and areal perspective

In this section, we consider how forms and systems used in the composition of AP numerals relate to those used in other languages. First, we place the AP numeral systems in a broad typological perspective ( ยง 7.1); next, we take an areal perspective, addressing the question to what extent the AP systems are similar to those of the surrounding Austronesian languages, and suggest where contact could have played a role in shaping the numerals ( ยง 7.2).

7.1 Typological rarities in AP numeral(s)we summarize the various systems that AP languages use to form cardinals 'five' through 'ten'. The Arabic numerals represent the numeral morphemes used in compounds, and the English words represent the lexical items that combine with those formatives. Thus, a compound numeral like Wersing Kolana wetinu 'six' would be transcribed as '5 single' as it is made up of weti,

7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages the morpheme for '5', and a lexeme nu, meaning 'single', while a compound numeral like Teiwa jesraq 'seven' would be transcribed as '5 2' as it is a compound of morphemes for '5' and '2'. Square brackets '[]' represent absent surface elements that are assumed to be part of the earlier numeral construction as we reconstructed it, while round brackets '( )' represent elements which may or may not be present depending on the details of the language in question. Two major typological points are of interest in the AP numeral systems. The first is that they combine a mono-morphemic 'six' with base-five compounds for numerals 'seven' to 'nine'. We reconstruct this system for proto-AP, and it is presently reflected in languages of northern Pantar and central Alor. Crosslinguistically, this is a rather uncommon numeral system; it is much more common to have a system where the quinary base is used in forming all numerals 'six' through nine', 15 as attested in the languages of east Alor. However, because pAP *talam 'six' is a reflex of the higher pTAP *talam 'six'