The forms listed for spouse's sibling apply also to the reciprocal sibling's spouse, with appropriate adjustment for reference. Thus, Kamang-noy is both 'woman's brother's wife' (fBW) and also 'husband's sister' (HZ).

A single affine term *dat can be tentatively reconstructed at the level of protoAlor Pantar. This term probably had the general meaning of 'affine kin' but was then restricted to affines in the descending generation as affines in the ascending generation were replaced by terms denoting the parents of cross-cousins. Crucially, the reconstructed affine term is distinct from terms denoted cross-cousins, suggesting that the original kinship terminology was not based on a direct exchange system where affines would be cross-cousins.

4 Marriage prescriptions

As discussed in the previous section, special terminology for cross-cousins is found in most of the Alor-Pantar languages. However, the role of cross-cousins and that of mother's brother varies significantly across the languages. In some languages the terminology denotes a privileged marriageable relationship, based 225 Gary Holton

irasi-airas

In yet other languages there is no marriage prescription, even though cross-cousins may be terminologically distinguished and play important roles in exchange relationships. Some common threads in marriage practices are found in all of the Alor-Pantar languages. Descent is patrilineal and almost always patrilocal, and exchange between descent groups plays a central role in social structure, linking lineages beyond the time span of the actual marriage. The bronze kettledrum, or moko, plays a central symbolic role in the exchange of bride wealth, and the relative valuations of the kettledrums serves to regulate the direction of circulation of women. Distinguishing between the ideology of marriage and the actual practice of marriage is difficult without a more detailed ethnographic study of marriage and exchange, and such a study is unfortunately beyond the scope of this chapter, which is necessarily preliminary.With that in mind this section focuses on a description of marriage prescriptions in the Alor-Pantar languages.

Three broad patterns of marriage prescription can be identified, as follows (see): (i) symmetrical systems in which the man draws a wife from either the mother's brother's or the father's sister's lineage;

(ii) asymmetrical systems in which the mother's brother's lineage serves as wife-giver;

(iii) non-prescriptive systems with no preference for marriage outside certain specific proscriptions;

In the following subsections I discuss each of these systems in turn. Within the third category we can further distinguish systems in which cross-cousin marriage is explicit ly proscribed. As shown insystems of marriage prescription are regionally distributed. Symmetrical systems are found throughout Pantar and on the eastern coast of Alor. Asymmetrical systems are found only in Kiraman, also located on the eastern coast of Alor. Non-prescriptive systems, including the completely proscriptive system in Kamang, are found in Central Alor and the Bird's Head. The marriage prescriptions do not match exactly with kinship terminology, proving the point that terminology does not determine practice. Exchange has a number of dimensions in Alor-Pantar which will only be illuminated with further study.

4.1 Symmetrical exchange

In Western Pantar, Teiwa, Blagar, and Wersing cross-cousin marriage is held up as the ideal. There is symmetrical exchange with no skewing toward either the mother's or the father's side. That is, there is no preference for marriage to ego's mother's brother's child over ego's father's sister's child. Systems of symmetrical exchange are found at the two extremes of the archipelago: among the languages of Pantar in the west and in Wersing along the eastern coast of Alor (). Here I focus on Western Pantar, since I am most familiar with the marriage customs there. I have no data on the actual extent of cross-cousin marriage, though I suspect it is quite rare. In Kedang, an Austronesian language spoken immediately to the west of Western Pantar,found a conformance rate of 58% with the cross-cousin marriage prescription rule. I suspect that the rate in Western Pantar is similar, though it was likely much greater in the past.Western Pantar treats all marriages as if they were between crosscousins. However, Western Pantar recognizes a distinction between marriage established through classificatory cross-cousins, and marriage to persons outside the region who cannot be traced as cross-cousins. The former are-baddang haila, literally 'base cross-cousin'; while the latter are-baddang wang gamining, literally 'cross-cousin included'. The-baddang wang gamining very literally included in that, once married, they are treated as if they were in fact-baddang for the purposes of identifying further kinship relationships via transitivity. There is a certain circularity to this system in that-baddang defines the ideal marriageable relationship, yet any marriage is treated as if the partners were-baddang, effectively establishing the-baddang relationship by fiat.