 Liquids-air, air susu, anggur, arak, teh

buah pinang, daun papaya, daging babi, ikan 31. Do particular semantics play a role in the interpretation of the value of the quantifiers? (e.g. (un)expected/(un)wanted value, e.g. many people come to church, more than expected, or when only a little bit of gas is sold less than expected (misalnya kalau banyak orang datang ke g<ereja, lebih dari harapan (atau hanya sedikit minyak dijual, kurang dari harapan).

8 Numeral words and arithmetic operations in the Alor-Pantar languages 32. Classifiers: We will make a separate questionnaire & stimuli for this at a later stage. If you have made some observations about the classifiers, please include them here.

A.2.4 Numerals 1-100

1 Introduction

The majority of the world's languages express nominal plurality by affixation. After affixation, the use of independent plural words is the most widespread strategy: it is used in 16% of Dryer's (2011) sample of 1066 languages. Yet, 'plural words' have received remarkably little attention since their preliminary treatment inIn this chapter, we build onin furthering the investigation of plural words using data from the Alor-Pantar (AP) languages, which are of great typological interest. A plural word is "a morpheme whose meaning and function is similar to that of plural affixes in other languages, but which is a separate word"Plural words are the most common example of a more general category, that of grammatical number words-a number of languages

employ singular or dual words as well as plural words. For Dryer, to be a plural word a lexeme must be the prime indicator of plurality: "I do not treat a word as a plural word if it co-occurs with an inflectional indication of plural on the noun"Dryer further makes a distinction between 'pure' number words and other kinds of number expressions: "We candistinguish 'pure' plural words, which only code plurality, from articles that code number in addition to other semantic or grammatical features of the noun phrase, in which these articles are the sole indicator of number in noun phrases". Thus the bar is set quite high: plural words are the prime indicator of plurality, and in the pure case they have this as their unique function.

Plural words in Alor-Pantar languages carry also a range of additional semantic connotations beyond simple plurality, including completeness, abundance, individuation, and partitivity. These are interrelated to the other options the individual languages have for marking plurality. This means that our discussion of plural words in Alor-Pantar languages necessarily also touches on other plurality expressing strategies available in the languages. We will see that the form, syntax and semantics of plural words across the Alor-Pantar languages display a high degree of diversity. This paper is structured as follows. § 2 introduces the lexical forms of the plural words of the languages and the sources of the data discussed in this paper. § 3 discusses their syntax, while § 4 looks in detail at the semantics of the plural words. § 5 places AP plural words in a wider typological context, and § 6 presents our conclusions.

2 Plural number words across Alor-Pantar

Plural words are found across the Alor-Pantar languages, as shown inCognate forms attested in Teiwa (West Pantar), Klon (West Alor) and Kamang (Central-East Alor) indicate that a plural word *non can be reconstructed for proto-Alor-Pantar (pAP). Western Pantar, Abui, Wersing, Kula and Sawila do not reflect this item, and instead appear to have innovated new lexemes for plural words. Several AP languages in our sample (Klon, Abui, Wersing, Kula and Sawila) have two plural words encoding different kinds of plurality, though the other languages do have a range of plural-marking strategies in addition to their plural word. There are also Alor-Pantar languages for which no plural word has been attested; an example is Kaera (North-East Pantar; Klamer 2014a).

In all Alor-Pantar languages, nouns are uninflected for number, and a noun phrase without a plural word can refer to any number of individuals. For in366 9 Plural number words in the Alor-Pantar languages

While plural words only occur with third person referents, none of the languages seems to have semantic restrictions on which referents can be marked plural. For instance, in all the languages we examined, both animate and inanimate entities can be pluralized. There does not seem to be a preference to use a plural word more often with animate than with inanimate nouns, or vice versa. In Wersing, for example, the plural word can be used to signal the plurality of a human (3), animal (4) or inanimate referent (5). There is similarly no difference in the plural marking of large versus small referents, as illustrated for Western Pantar raya 'chief' (6) and bal 'ball'