Note that Kamang-auko 'mother' likely contains a fossilized endearment suffix 218 5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages-ko. Also, while reflexes of 'older sibling' are not found in the three Pantar languages in this sample, the reconstruction is supported by Nedebang-nang. Two additional forms 'younger sibling' and 'opposite-sex sibling' may also be reconstructable (see), but those forms are not as widely attested as these four.

'mother' 'father' *-mam

Unfortunately, the reconstructions indo not shed light on the actual structure of the kinship system, and the tag glosses given for the reconstructions should be taken as a rough indication of the relevant kin category. For example, reflexes of *mam 'father' may refer to 'F' alone, 'F, FB', or even 'F, FB, MB'. In order to understand the nature of the original Alor-Pantar kinship system we must compare the semantic structure of the kin terms, particularly as they relate to the distinction of cross-cousins and mother's brother.

The semantic distribution of the terms corresponding to the six kin type primitives in the first ascending generation are given inindicates kin type primitives which are classed together with the same term. The table reveals that even where kinship vocabulary is cognate across languages, the terms may have differing semantic values. For example, Kamang-paa and Wersing-pa 'father' are obviously cognate, but the meaning of the Kamang form is also extended to 'father's brother' but not to 'mother's brother', which has a distinct term in Kamang. In contrast, Wersing use the same term-paidem/-par.

For the purposes of this comparison optional age-based modifier terms are excluded. Thus, while Abui may refer to MB as-maama fing or-maama kokda, according to whether alter is older or younger, respectively, than ego's parent, this term is here considered to be classed with-maama F. Wersing presents some 219 Gary Holton

Wersing difficulties for this convention, since the Wersing terms for parents' siblings are derived from the terms for M and F together with suffixes idem and-r, depending on whether alter is older or younger, respectively, than ego's parent. However, in contrast to the Abui situation, these suffixes are not semantically transparent to Wersing speakers. While Abui-maama kokda is transparently 'younger father', Wersing-par 'FyB, MyB' is not seen by Wersing speakers as related in any way to-pa 'father'. Hence, for the purposes of this analysis the opaque Wersing suffixes are retained. Were the suffixes to be discarded the Wersing system would look like that found in Abui, which has only two primary terms in the ascending generation, corresponding to males and females.

Most of the languages described here have a distinct term for MB. The one marginal case is found in Adang, which classes MB and FB together as imang sel. However, only MB and his descendants can be denoted by the term asel. This suggests that the sel modifier has been extended from MB to FB. In any case, MB is still distinguished by a distinct term. That leaves only Abui and Wersing lacking a distinct MB term.

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

For the female ascending terms, there is less consensus across the languages. The Pantar languages all distinguish FZ from M and MZ, but three languages class all female kin of the first ascending generation together. Kamang follows yet another pattern which distinguishes both male and female kin on the mother's side.

Comparing terminology across the six languages which have a distinct MB term reveals that the MB term in most cases has been derived from the term for father plus a modifier which can be translated as 'base'The presence of the 'base' formative is most transparent in Blagar, Kiraman, and Kamang, where the forms era, yira, and ela, respectively, can be identified. In Western Pantar and Teiwa the rhotic is likely a reduced form of the 'base' formative, though it does not occur synchronically as such. In the Western Pantar case a comparison with the Lamma dialect, where the word for 'father' is-iba, shows that the rhotic is unique to the MB term. The Adang formative sel also means 'base' but is used to denote MB without the-mang term.

The broad semantics of the 'base' forms are well articulated for Blagar inCognates and semantically similar terms are found across many of the Alor Pantar languagesA prototypical usage would be Kamang bong ela 'base of tree'. This usage of the 'base' modifier derives from a more widespread botanic metaphor which is common throughout Eastern IndonesiaAmong the eight languages considered here only Wersing appears to completely lack a kinship modifier based on a botanic term

Turning now to ego's generation we find that these kinship terms often come in multiple overlapping sets of terminologies, and choice between terminologies may be pragmatically governed. Age-based systems for siblings are found in all of the languages except Blagar. Gender-based systems for siblings are found in all 221 Gary Holton