A crucial aspect of the Western Pantar kinship system is that all marriages are treated as if they were marriages between cross-cousins, even when they are not. Thus, if I marry a woman who is not my-baddang, I assume relationships to her kin as if she were my cross-cousin. In particular, I refer to her parents as nirasi, while they refer to me as nairas. So, affine terminology can to a large part be derived from the consanguine terminology with the assumption of cross-cousin marriage (see

Gary Holton

Moreover, some rather distant relationships can appear quite close. For example, inthe relationship between ego and C is one of cross-cousins; that is, ego calls C na'ar. This is true even though the biological parents of ego and C are not biological siblings. The key here is that the parents of ego and C are indeed classificatory siblings. This is because A and B, as children of same-sex siblings, are themselves classificatory siblings, hence B's sister, who is also C's mother, must also be sister to A.

The genetic distance between relationships such as those indoes not go unnoticed, particularly with respect to the opposite-sex sibling termsipang 'man's sister' and-iyang 'woman's brother'. The word haila 'base, main, area' can be used to indicate a relationship which is perceived to be biologically closer. Thus,-ipang haila 'man's sister, closely related' and-iyang haila 'woman's brother, closely related'. The terms containing haila do not necessarily indicate biological siblings but are mainly contrastive in usage, indicating a closer relationship. The use of haila is based on the metaphor yattu haila, denoting the area underneath the branches of a tree (yattu 'tree').

Affine terminology in ego's generation is derived from sibling terminology, qualified with the gender terms manne 'female' and ammu 'male'. The choice of sibling term indicates the relationship either between ego and ego's sibling or between ego's spouse and ego's spouse's sibling. The gender qualifiers are used to indicate the gender of the referent for affine terms. Thus,-i'e occurs in constructions referring to 'woman's older sister', 'man's wife's elder sister' (-i'e manne), and 'woman's elder sister's husband' (-i'e ammu). Since younger siblings are not differentiated by ego's gender, the affine terms derived fromiaku 'younger sibling' are synonymous between spouse's sibling and sibling's spouse.

There is a paucity of Western Pantar terms referring to generations two or more removed from ego. The terms kuba 'old woman' and wenang 'old man' can be used vocatively for 'grandmother' and 'grandfather', respectively. These terms can also be used to derive polite forms of address for one's paternal grandparents, namely, manne kuba 'father's mother' (literally, 'female old woman') and-ikkar wenang 'father's father' (literally, 'man's elder brother old man'). The terms kuba and wenang can also be used referentially in conjunction with a possessive pronoun, though the reference need not be restricted to persons of the second generation above ego.

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

In Teiwa, as in many of the AP languages, there are two sets of sibling terminologies with a certain amount of overlap in usage (Seeat the end of this section). The first is gender-based, distinguishing-gasqai 'classificatory sister' and-ianqai 'classificatory brother'. These terms include both siblings and parallel cousins. These terms are evidently bimorphemic, as the second contrasts with-ian 'cross-cousin'. The second morpheme qai may possibly be related to qai 'only' or-oqai 'child'. The form-gas on its own has no meaning. A second set of sibling terminology is age-based, distinguishing-ka'au 'elder sibling' and-bif 'younger sibling'. There is a strong preference for using the age-based terminology with same-sex siblings and using the gender-based terminology with opposite-sex siblings, but this preference does not form a strict division between the two terminologies. Cross-cousins are not referred to by either of these terminologies but instead by the term-ian. Opposite-sex cross-cousins, i.e., marriageable cross-cousins, are referred to as-dias. In contrast to Western Pantar, cross-cousin terminology does not distinguish the gender of either the ego or the referent (see

Marriageable cross-cousins can also be referred to as-bruman yis, though this term is not used as a term of address. The term-bruman itself indicates 'marriageable one' and may have been borrowed from neighboring Blagar-boromung, which is the sole term for marriageable cross-cousin in that language. The qualifier yis denotes 'fruit'. In Teiwa the unqualified term-bruman is not necessarily restricted to children of one's parent's opposite-sex sibling, but may apply more broadly. Preference for cross-cousin marriage remains strong in Teiwa, and marriages which fail to meet this criteria-that is, marriages not to one who is in the 'marriageable' category denoted by bruman-are not as readily integrated Gary Holton into the kinship system as they are in Western Pantar. As in Western Pantar marriages are treated as if they obeyed cross-cousin rules, even when they don't. Thus, one refers to the sibling of one's sibling's spouse as a cross-cousin, for had one's sibling married their cross-cousin, that person would be one's cross-cousin as well. However, in Teiwa, when a same-sex sibling marries a non cross-cousin, speakers express reluctance to call this sibling's spouse (fZH, mBW) by the term-dias, since in some sense this person is not really a cross-cousin. This is avoided by using the more general cross-cousin term-ian, or simply by addressing the sibling's spouse as-gasqai 'sister'. The Teiwa kinship system contains the largest inventory of mono-morphemic terms relating to cross-cousins of any of the eight languages discussed here. Uniquely, it has distinct mono-morphemic terms referring to father's sister-xaler and mother's brother-umeer. In the other languages one or more of these terms is derived. In Western Pantar the term FZ is derived from MB ( ยง 2.1); in Blagar the terms MB and FZ are derived from F and M, respectively ( ยง 2.3). In terms of both structure and practice the Teiwa exhibits an extremely symmetrical system, with equal distinction given to the father's sister and mother's brother.