As in Western Pantar, affines in ego's generation employ the same terms as used for cross-cousins. The spouse of one's opposite-sex sibling is referred to as-ian, while the spouse of one's same-sex sibling is referred to as-dias. Affines in the descending generation are denoted-rat, regardless of gender, while affines in the ascending generation are denoted by the same terms used for mother's brother and father's sister, namely-umeer or-xaler.

Many Teiwa kinship terms can be further modified for relative age. All of the ascending terms can be modified with uwaad 'big' and sam 'small' to indicate relatively older or younger age, respectively (these modifiers are omitted from

iik 'youngest'. Terms which are not already specified for gender can be optionally specified with eqar 'female' or masar 'male'; thus, noqai eqar 'my daughter'.

Gary Holtonemploys a single set of gender-based terminology for classificatory siblings (siblings and parallel cousins) which distinguishes-kaku 'same-sex sibling' and-edi 'opposite-sex sibling'. Cross-cousins are distinguished by the term-ebheang. Additionally, cross-cousins of the opposite-sex may be optionally referred to as-boromung. Like its Teiwa cognate-bruman, the term-boromung distinguishes marriageable cross-cousins, or what Steinhauer refers to as "potential spouses". However, this term is avoided in the presence of the referent, in which case-ebheang is preferredThe term-ebheang refers to all cross-cousins, regardless of the gender of ego or referent.

The parents of ego's cross-cousins-i.e., ego's father's sister and her husband, and ego's mother's brother and his wife-are distinguished by compounding the classificatory mother and father terms with era 'base'. The reciprocal relationship is indicated by-bhilang. This terminology changes when cross-cousin marriages are actually realized. If ego marries his or her cross-cousin, then ego's-imang era and-iva era become simply-idat 'in-laws'. Similarly, these new parents-in-law now also refer to ego as-idat rather than-bhilang, so that-idat is its own reciprocal. Affines in ego's generation are denoted-des, though this term is usually restricted to same-sex referents.Terms which do not inherently indicate gender may be optionally specified as zangu 'female' or mehal 'male', e.g., nidat mehal 'my male in-law'. Thus,-idat zangu 'female in-law'.

Terms which are not gender specific can be additionally marked for gender using the terms zangu 'female' and mehal 'male'; thus, noqal zangu 'my daugh-5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages ter'. Generations further removed from ego may be optionally specified with the modifier zasi (literally, 'bad'). Thus, the child of one's-bhilang can be referred to as-bhilang zasi. Further details regarding the functioning of the Blagar kinship system can be found in Steinhauer (1993).

2.4 Kiraman

Kiraman employs just one primary set of terminology for ego's generation. This terminology is both age and gender based. Older and younger are distinguished for same-sex terms, while age is not distinguished for the opposite-sex terms. A second terminology is employed only for vocatives and distinguishes baki 'elder' from ika 'younger'. (Terms with strictly vocative usage are omitted from the tables.) Siblings and cousins are not distinguished via either of these terminologies.

In particular, Kiraman does not obligatorily distinguish cross-cousins from siblings; however, certain cross-cousins can be optionally distinguished using the term-eni, which denotes both a woman's male paternal cross-cousin (fFZS) and a

Gary Holton man's female maternal cross-cousin (mMBD). This term is its own reciprocal and denotes a marriageable relationship or a right of marriage (see ยง 4.2). Crucially, this term excludes a man's paternal opposite-sex cross-cousin, as well as the reciprocal relationship, a woman's maternal opposite-sex cross-cousin. The term eni is sometimes extended to include one's sibling's-eni as well-that is, a man's male paternal cross-cousin (mFZS) or a woman's female maternal cross-cousin (fMBD).

Kiraman ascending terminology distinguishes ego's mother's brother's side through the terms-ma(m)yira MB and-iyayira MBW, transparently derived from the terms-mam 'father' and-iyai 'mother' plus yira 'base'. Other ascending relationships referring to ego's parent's siblings and their spouses are denoted using the terms for mother and father modified by baki 'older' or ika 'younger', depending on the age of the referent relative to ego's mother or father, respectively. In particular, father's sister is not distinguished from mother except through the use of a relative age modifier. Descendants of one's-mayira and-iyayira can be optionally denoted nengeta. The reciprocal term is meigeta. Neither nengeta nor meigeta is used as a term of address. Descending terminology does not distinguish between biological children and children of ego's siblings but rather groups C, BC, ZC together as-iyol 'classificatory child'.