The West Bomberai language Baham also shows striking similarities to TAP languages. The Baham pronouns are given in, with the pAP pronouns for comparison. In the possessives, these pronouns show a first singular ne, a third singular ka, and a first plural ni that appear cognate to the corresponding pAP pronouns. The third person plural may be cognate in the first segment. Other pronouns appear innovative.

The Baham vocabulary reveals thirteen potential TAP cognates. Six of these terms are also found in Iha, and three have been reconstructed for pTNG: pTNG *na-'eat, drink', pTNG *inda 'tree', and pTNG *tukumba(C) 'short'.

Once again, based on these thirteen potential cognates and the pronouns we can suggest potential sound correspondences). Unsurprisingly, these correspondences are similar to the ones we propose for Iha, including a correspondence of pre-nasalized stops in Baham to voiced stops in pTAP, although the Baham form for 'tree' (cf. TAP 'fire, wood') does not fit that trend.

The West Bomberai language Karas also shows several potential cognates with TAP languages, although information on Karas is more sparse than for Iha or Baham. In the vocabulary (Donohue, p.c.), nine potential cognates were identified, six of which are also found in both Iha and Baham. Three of these are reconstructed for pTNG: *na-'eat, drink', pTNG *me-'to come', and pTNG *amu 'breast'.

We can establish tentative correspondences from these forms, although most correspondences occur only once in these data, and the final /n/ in Karas 'tail' is unexplained.

In the lexicon, then, the strongest correspondences are with West Bomberai languages, allowing us to posit some (very tentative) sound correspondences. In the pronouns, Iha shows an inclusive/exclusive distinction, with an exclusive pronoun that looks superficially similar to the reconstructed pAP inclusive pronoun *pi-. However, the sound correspondences suggest Iha mb : pTAP p, so perhaps both forms are independently innovated, with the similarity in vowels due to analogy with other pronouns in the paradigm (i.e., plurals have the vowel /i/) and the similarity in consonants due to chance. An alternative explanation would rely on borrowing, which we return to in the following section.

4 The linguistic position of the Timor-Alor-Pantar languages

6 Discussion

We have considered three hypotheses regarding the wider genealogical affiliations of the TAP languages. We now return to the null hypothesis proposed in ยง 1 (that the TAP languages are a family-level isolate) and consider the strength of the evidence with regard to each of the proposals. The pronominal evidence points much more clearly toward a link with TNG as opposed to NH. The TAP pronouns share with TNG a vowel grading /a/ vs. /i/ in the singular vs. plural, respectively. In addition, TNG second person pronouns correspond well with TAP third person pronouns, although this correspondence requires us to posit a semantic flip between second and third person forms. This flip renders the pronominal evidence much weaker than it otherwise might be. The primary trace of similarity between the TAP and NH pronouns lies in the TAP first person distributive form, which resembles the NH first person singular. It is of course possible that the TAP pronoun system has been influenced by both TNG and NH languages, as suggested by

In the lexicon, there is no evidence supporting a genealogical connection between TAP and NH languages. The lexical evidence for a link with TNG is more promising, and a few regular sound correspondences emerge, but a critical eye limits the number to thirteen, so we cannot establish a robust connection. However, if we focus our attention just on the West Bomberai languages, the pronominal and lexical evidence looks more promising and warrants further investigation. It is possible that the TAP and Bomberai languages are related either via a deep genealogical connection or via a more casual contact relationship. If it is a 183 genealogical relationship, it is not yet clear whether they are both part of TNG or whether they share a relationship independent of that family.

The spread of TNG is conventionally linked to the development of agriculture in the New Guinea highlands about 10,000 years ago (Bellwood 2001), with a westward spread somewhat later, perhaps around 6,000 BP). This would place any putative TAP-TNG genealogical connection at the upper limits of what is possible using the comparative method. Another possibility is that the weak signal linking TAP with Bomberai is the result not of an ancient genealogical connection, but rather of more recent contact. The West Bomberai groups, for example, have a history of slavingIt is possible that they took Timor-Alor-Pantar peoples as slaves at some point, and that this is the source of the connection between the two groups. More investigation of the social history of pre-Austronesian contact in East Nusantara is greatly needed.

In conclusion, the existing evidence provides only weak support for a connection between TAP and Papuan languages spoken to the east. The most promising hypothesis would connect TAP with the West Bomberai languages, but even here the evidence is thin and does not support a definitive conclusion. We hope that new field research on the Bomberai languages, combined with reconstruction of proto-Bomberai, will eventually help clarify this question.