Kamang terminology in the first ascending generation is unique among the languages described in this chapter. Paternal terms are merged with father and mother, but maternal terms are distinguished via the modifier ela. This is shown inSome speakers merge both the maternal and paternal sides in casual reference, though they still optionally distinguish the maternal side via ela. In vocative address, all members of the first ascending generation are addressed as nepaa 'my father' or nauko 'my mother'. nepaa nauko ela nepaa ela nepaa nauko nauko

Gary Holton

Affines in ego's generation are denoted by-nabeng. This term is its own reciprocal. Female affines may be optionally called-noy by a female ego. Spouses of same-sex siblings refer to each other as-mot. This same term is used by wives to refer to other wives sharing the same husband. In the ascending and descending generations only a single affine term is used, namely,-nataka. This term is independent of gender and is its own reciprocal.

2.8 Wersing

Wersing does not make an obligatory distinction between siblings and cousins, though cross-cousins are covertly distinguished, as discussed below. There are two sets of terminology for classificatory siblings (hereafter simply siblings), agebased and gender-based. The age-based terminology distinguishes-nang 'older sibling' from-kaku 'younger sibling'. The gender-based terminology consists of the single term-arudi 'opposite-sex sibling'. Thus, only the age-based terms may be used for same-sex siblings. The age-based terms are most commonly used also for opposite-sex siblings; the gender-based term is considered more formal or endearing.

In addition to the classificatory sibling terminologies, same-sex children of opposite-sex siblings, i.e., same-sex cross-cousins, are referred to as-beng. This same term is used for affines in ego's generation which are related through oppositesex siblings. Thus,-beng denotes mZH, WB, fBW, HZ. These are precisely the people whose children can call ego's children-beng. A man's female maternal cross-cousin (mMBD) is not referred to or addressed as-beng but is instead tacitly considered to be a spouse, at least until the man marries someone else. Instead, a man's female maternal cross-cousin may be referred to (but not addressed) as-mei deng, literally 'female female-side'. A woman in turn refers to her male paternal cross-cousin by the reciprocal term-limi deng, literally, 'male female-side'.The term deng itself derives from a plural marker but in this context denotes a man's mother's brother's family.

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

Affines in ascending and descending generations are referred to by the termtat 'spouse's parent, child's spouse'. In contrast to languages like Teiwa, Wersing lacks distinct terms for MB and FZ which may be employed for affines in the ascending generation. Hence, the term-tat is used reciprocally. The spouse of one's opposite sex sibling is-beng and thus treated as a same-sex cross-cousin. The same term denotes the reciprocal relationship of one's spouse's oppositesex sibling. The spouse of one's spouse's opposite-sex sibling thus counts as an opposite-sex cross-cousin and is thus "marriageable". However, this person is generally referred to with an age-based sibling term-nang or-kaku, though never as-arudi, as that term is reserved for consanguine relations.

In the first ascending generation ego's parent's siblings and their spouses are all referred to by one of the terms-paidem 'older uncle',-par 'younger uncle',yidem 'older aunt',-yar 'younger aunt' (seeThe terms-pa 'father' and-ya 'mother' are reserved for biological and adoptive parents only. No distinction is made between maternal and paternal aunts and uncles. The elder terms are clearly derived from-pa 'father' and-ya 'mother' plus idem 'eldest'; however, speakers do not recognize a morphological division here; nor do they view these terms as referring literally to an older or younger father or mother. The reciprocal term for-paidem,-par,-yidem, and-yar, as well as-pa and-ya, is simply-ol 'child'.

The term-tam is used for kin in the second ascending and descending generations. Thus, grandchildren and grandparents address each other by the same term, netam. For ascending generations above this the term-nakar, literally 'earlier times', is used. For descending generations below this the term-silu, literally 'sprout, bud', is used.

Gary Holton

3 Summary and comparison of kinship terms

Given the close genealogical relationships between the Alor-Pantar languages, there is relatively little shared kinship vocabulary. Holton & Robinson (this volume) reconstruct just three kinship terms: 'father', 'child', and 'older sibling', though it should be noted that the methodology used to elicit vocabulary for that study may have overlooked potential cognate forms with differing semantic values. To these three we might add 'mother', for which it is difficult to propose an actual reconstruction, since it appears to be composed of a sequence of two vowels, and the vowel correspondences have yet to be worked out (see