). There are reports that Alorese was used as the language of wider communication in the Alor-Pantar region until at least the mid 1970s (see, but as such it did not make inroads into the central mountainous areas of Pantar or Alor, and its lingua franca function may have been limited to Pantar and the Straits in between Pantar and Alor.

The vocabulary of Alorese is clearly (Malayo-Polynesian) Austronesian. On the basis of a short word list,suggest that the language spoken on the Alor and Pantar coasts is a dialect of Lamaholot. Lamaholot is an Austronesian language spoken on the islands west of Pantar: Lembata, Solor, Adonara, and East Flores. 1 Recent research however indicates that Alorese and Lamaholot show significant differences in lexicon as well as grammar: Alorese and Lamaholot share only 50-60% of their basic vocabulary, severely hindering mutual intelligibility; the languages have different sets of pronouns and different possessive constructions; and, most striklingly, Alorese lacks all the inflectional and derivational morphology that is present in Lamaholot). The evidence clearly suggests that Alorese should be considered a language in its own right.

1 The Alor-Pantar languages: Linguistic context, history and typology

Oral history and ethnographic observations) report local traditions about non-indigenous, Austronesian groups arriving in the northern coastal parts of Pantar around 1,300 AD whose descendants colonized the coasts of north-western Pantar and west Alor. Some of the locations mentioned are home to speakers of Alorese.Apart from Alorese, there are also languages spoken by more recent Austronesian immigrants. For instance, Bajau (or Bajo) is the language of the nomadic communities located throughout most of Indonesia which are also referred to as "sea gypsies" (cf.There are reports that there has been a community of Bajau on Pantar since the early 1800s (Laura C. Robinson p.c.). One or more groups of Bajau came from Sulawesi, through Flores, and settled on the coast near Kabir, on Pantar island, in the 1950s. A second wave of Bajau speakers arrived from East Timor in 1999. Bajau communities are also found on Alor.

2.3 Indonesian and Alor Malay

Indonesian has been introduced relatively recently in the Alor-Pantar region, roughly correlating with the increasing number of Indonesian primary schools established in rural areas since the 1960s. Today, speakers of the Alor Pantar languages employ Indonesian and/or the local variety of Malay as language of trade, education, and governmental business.

The Alor Malay variety was already in use in the Alor-Pantar archipelago before standard Indonesian was introduced. Alor Malay is based on the Malay variety spoken in Kupang, the capital of the Indonesian province Nusa Tenggara Timor (NTT) which is located on Timor island, though there are significant differences between the two, particularly in the pronouns.

Alor and Pantar were under (remote) Portuguese control till 1860, and Dutch colonial influence only became apparent in the first decades of the 20 th century (see ยง 4). In 1945, van Gaalen reports that "[on the Kabola peninsula] the majority of the people can speak Malay"It was probably there, and in the main town Kalabahi that most of the (few) Dutch government schools were located. But the influence of the Dutch schools must have been fairly limited, because in 1937 (after being a Dutch colony for over 60 years), only 7.5% of the children on Alor were going to school (2,089 out of a total population of 28,063 boys and girls)comments on the situation of Malay in schools in central Alor as being desolate, and notes in passing that in her research location Atimelang there were only about 20 boys who understood Malay (possibly implying that girls were not attending the school). The picture emerges that many areas in central and east Alor remained mostly unexposed to Malay. On the other hand, certain areas that were converted to Christianity before World War II may have been exposed to Malay earlier through the churches; this may have been the case in the Teiwa, Kaera and Western Pantar speaking areas in Pantar, and the Apui area in central Alor.

One result of the increasing use of Alor Malay and Indonesian by speakers of local Papuan languages is a rapidly on-going language shift from vernacular to languages of wider communication. None of the Alor-Pantar languages is "safe, " and most are definitely endangered, in that many children are not learning the language in the home. Local languages are not used or taught in schools, as primary school teachers often have a different language background, and orthographies and dictionaries have only recently been produced for some of the languages. Language shift to Indonesian/Malay is often accelerated by urbanization and the practice of schooling children in urban centers away from their home vernacular language areas. For instance, until recently children from Pantar or east Alor went to senior high school (SMA) in Kalabahi or Kupang; only recently did Pantar get its own SMA schools, in Kabir and Baranusa. Language attitudes play an additional role in the shift to Indonesian, as the local languages lack prestige value.