However, the history of numerals also involves formal changes which cannot be couched in terms of regular sound correspondences. Many irregular changes observed in numerals arise from members of compounds fusing together over time. In the history of AP numerals, two types of change are associated with the compounding process: (i) segmental reduction in the members of a compound, (ii) dissimilation of segments across members of a compound.

Examples of segmental reduction in numeral compounds are widespread in AP languages. For instance, in the Atoitaa dialect of Kamang, numerals 'seven' to 'nine' are formed with iwesi 'five' followed by a numeral 'one' to 'four'. This is illustrated for 'six' in (1). In forming the compound, the medial syllable of 'five', /we/, is lost due to a shift in stress to the penultimate syllable. Unreduced forms involving two distinct phonological forms are only produced by speakers when explaining numeral formation and have not been observed in naturalistic speech, indicating that the reduced form is already well incorporated into speakers' lexicons.

Dissimilation of segments across members of a compound is also found. An example is Klon tidorok 'eight', a form which must have involved consonant dissimilation of the protoform *turarok (see) and a hypothetical intermediate form like **tudarok

In short, the reconstruction of numerals must take into account regular sound changes as well as irregular changes in the members of compounds.

4 Numerals 'one' to 'five'

The numerals 'one' to 'five' are for the most part simple mono-morphemic words in Alor-Pantar.presents an overview with the reconstructions to protoAlor-Pantar (pAP).The Proto-AP numerals 'one' to 'five' have been retained in most of its descendants. Only in eastern Alor have numerals in this range been innovated.

A non-etymological initial /a/ is present on Western Pantar 'one' and 'four' and Reta 'one'. This development is apparently due to analogy with the numerals 'two' and possibly 'three'. Such analogical adjustments in numeral forms, sometimes referred to as 'onset runs' (Matisoff 1995), are cross-linguistically relatively common.The prothetic /a/ is also found on Western Pantar 'thousand' which can be realized as either ribu or aribu, an Austronesian loan.

7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages

The etymologies of the AP numerals 'two' and 'five' have been the subject of some speculation and typological interest. In his early comparative study on Alor-Pantar languages,) makes two observations about these AP numerals which are not supported by our data. First, his claim that AP languages frequently use the root 'tooth' to express 'five' is not supported by more recent historical work on the family, which reconstructs 'five' as pAP *jiwesin, and 'tooth' as *-uas(in)It should also be noted that no known cognitive link exists between 'five' and 'tooth', unlike the link between 'fiveSecond, contra Stokhof, pAP *(a)tiga 'three' is not a loan word from Malay, despite the similarity with Malay tiga 'three'. Whilst there is evidence of Austronesian influence in pAP,there is no evidence of influence from Malay. Malay first arrived in the AlorPantar region in colonial times, 8 thousands of years after the likely break-up of pAP. If there were an Austronesian numeral 'three' borrowed into the family, this would more likely be similar to proto-Austronesian *telu 'three'instead of Malay tiga. The Austronesian languages surrounding Alor-Pantar reflect proto-Austronesian *telu. For instance, Alorese (an Austronesian language spoken on the coasts of Pantar and Alor) has tilu, Kedang (on Lembata) has telu, the language of Atauro (a small island of the north coast of Timor) has hetelu and Tetun Fehan (on Timor) has tolu.

In short, AP languages have by and large cognate forms for numerals 'one' to 'five' that reflect monomorphemic lexemes inherited from proto-AP.

5 Numerals 'six' to 'nine'

Unlike numerals 'one' to 'five' which show significant stability across the AP group, numerals 'six' to 'nine' have undergone several changes in their history.Liquid-stop metathesis has occurred in Blagar-Bama akur 'two', but not in other Blagar dialects.In Abui and Kamang, the vowels in 'four' display some irregular patterns. For Kamang, it is necessary to posit the following metathesis: Proto-Alor Pantar *buta < *bita < biat. 7 For instance, pAP *bui 'betel nut' is probably borrowed from Austronesian (proto-West MalayoPolynesian) *buyuq 'leaf of betel vine' (Blust nd).The function of Malay as the lingua franca of the Dutch East Indies appears irrelevant for Alor-Pantar, as the area was under (remote) Portuguese control till 1860, and Dutch colonial influence only became apparent in the first decades of the 20 th century (Klamer 2010: 14 and references cited there). There is no evidence that Malay was used as a trade language in the Alor archipelago in pre-colonial times. On the other hand, there is anecdotal evidence that Alorese was used for interethnic communications in Pantar and coastal parts of west Alor until the mid 20 th century (Klamer 2011).