The four languages for which we have reflexes of proto-elevationals marked with *= 'loc' are Adang, Kamang, Wersing and Sawila. In the latter three the morpheme is fused on, whilst in Adang reflexes of *= only occur on one paradigm and the basic elevational forms combine with other affixes in other paradigms (e.g., h-in the demonstratives, or-l in directional elevationals). In the East Alor languages, Wersing and Sawila, the forms have further fossilized suffixed with-a, a morpheme of unknown significance at this stage.It appears that *= was used originally on the elevationals to make them into locative predicates. This is seen in that, whilst Blagar and Western Pantar cannot use their "bare" elevationals as predicates, the elevationals marked with *= as in Adang, Wersing and Sawila can be predicates. From there, *= would have become fixed on the elevationals, even in adverbial function where it would not have been needed originally in pAP, as is suggested by the adverbial use of "bare" elevationals in Blagar and Western Pantar.I give this morpheme its phonetic rather than phonemic value for ease of explication. It seems likely that, as in many modern AP languages, in pAP the velar nasal was a word-final allophone of pAP *n.Wersing has an enclitic article =a 'art' which marks NPs for specificity, and a suffix-a which marks realis mood on verbs. Note there is some evidence for the existence of elevationals in Wersing without-a. In Schapper and Hendery, Wersing corpus., there are two instances of yo that were said by an informant to have the same meaning as yona.

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages

4.2 Proto-elevational verbspresents pAP elevational verbs and their reflexes in the eleven modern AP languages for which we have data. Differences between the reconstructed meaning and the modern meaning of the verbs are given below the table.

The reconstruction of the paradigm with proto-forms of the verbs in the level and high domains is robust and well-supported. Reflexes of these are found throughout the Alor-Pantar area with consistent form-meaning pairings. Some small irregularity is observed in the sound correspondences of reflexes, particularly amongst the reflexes of *medai() 'come.low'. Teiwa daa, Kaera and Blagar da and Wersing dai all show loss of the initial syllable of *medai(). It is likely that the initial syllable of the verb was unstressed (i.e., *medai()), as is often found in Alor-Pantar roots made up of a light-heavy syllable series. Historical loss of initial unstressed syllables has been observed repeatedly in AP languages (

The reconstruction of proto-forms of elevational verbs in the low domain is more complex due to the existence of two competing 'come.low' forms, *seri and *ya(). The majority of AP languages have a reflex of only one of these two. Typically, Pantar languages have reflexes of *ya() for 'come.low', while west Alor languages have reflexes of *seri for 'come.low'. Only east Alor languages have reflexes of both, with a reflex of *seri for 'come.low' and a reflex of *ya() for 'go.low', while no reflexes of *pia are found, as would be expected for 'go.low'. 8 At this stage, both *ya() and *seri are reconstructed to pAP, because evidence for reconstructing one over the other is thin. The slightly wider distribution of reflexes of *ya() might be taken to indicate that this was the earlier term, and that *seri was introduced into the elevational verb paradigm soon after the breakup of the proto-language. One potential source for this introduction would be verbs such as Kamang sila 'descend', a verb which is not part of the elevation paradigm proper as it is not anchored to a deictic centre as elevational verbs are.

4.3 Elaborations of the proto-system

Having reconstructed the elevational system of pAP, we are now in a position to investigate changes to pAP elevational system and establish various developmental paths that have been taken by individual languages or groups of languages since the breakup of the pAP. Note that I am concerned here not with adding

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages further elevation-marked terms to the set through innovative morphology (e.g., Adang directional elevationals marked with-l), so much as with the processes by which distinctions within the elevational system are elaborated.

The first observation to be made is that the pAP elevational system has often altered where new elevation terms (i.e., not reflecting the proto-terms) have emerged. Abui elevationals are an example of this, since reflexes of pAP elevationals are entirely absent in this language (see). Abui has innovated new terms with a tonal distinction between high and low elevations, with a further distance contrast being added between near and far locations, the latter marked by /w/, the former by its absence. Western Pantar complicates its system of elevational motion verbs towards the dc by incorporating the innovative verbs diaka and rau into the paradigm alongside mia and pia, reflexes of the pAP elevational motion verbs *mid(a) 'go.high' and *pia 'go.low'. Diaka and rau have been incorporated into the paradigm for motion along gentle slopes, thereby causing the restriction of meaning of the inherited verbs to be for steeper slopes. Holton (p.c.) notes that for some speakers the innovative steep terms, diaka and rau, have even largely replaced the inherited gentle slope terms, mia and pia, in casual speech.