 Check e.g. 1000, 2000, 100, 500, 1 000 000, 2 000 000 11. Can cardinals be used as elliptical for a fuller NP (subject or object): Mau berapa buah pisang? Saya mau dua (dua buah/dua pisang)

12. Can cardinals be used as abstract entities, e.g. in contexts like:

 Waktu mengajar anak menulis guru bilang: "Coba menulis angka/nomor dua dan angka dua belas sekarang" 'When the teacher taught the children to write, he said: " Please write digit/number two and number/digit 12 now'.

Try the same with some higher numerals:

 Guru bilang kepada anak: Angka dua puluh itu masih terlalu kecil 'that number 20 is still too small'

Try the same for angka lima belas, tiga puluh, seratus, seribu, dua ribu, (se)jutah.

13. Reduplication of cardinals: Can numerals be reduplicated? If so, give some examples in sentential context.

 Try 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 12, 17, 15, 20, 50, 100, 500, 1000.

14. What does the reduplication mean? E.g. Malay beribu-ribu orang datang ke kota itu 'People came in thousands to that town' (vs. ribuan orang 'thousands of people') 15. Does reduplicated 'one' have any special meaning? E.g. Bunaq uenuen means 'same, equal'; Kamang no-nok 'one by one'.

16. Where do numeral reduplications occur: before or after the noun? Before or after the verb? Please provide some example sentences.

17. Do reduplicated numerals occur as part of NPs in 'attributive' function (as in Malay beribu-ribu orang)? Or do they occur in 'predicative' function?

18. Check reduplication of NPs encoding subject/actor vs NPs encoding object/undergoer:

 Dua orang laki-laki membawa papan. Satu demi satu mereka membawa papan = one carrier at the time vs.

 Dua orang laki-laki membawa papan. Mereka membawa papan satu demi satu = one plank at the time 19. Note down the distribution of Ordinals:

 as part of NP:

Orang pertama yang membeli tv adalah Markus 'The first person to buy a radio was Markus' 360 8 Numeral words and arithmetic operations in the Alor-Pantar languages

 as sth. similar to a non-verbal predicate:

Lidia adalah orang pertama yang pergi ke Kupang 'Lidia was the first person who went to Kupang'

 with an inanimate noun:

Mereka masuk jalan kedua-Kepala desa membangunkan rumahnya kedua(or rumah keduanya) pada tahun yang lalu

 modifying the predicate, in adverbial-like function:

Mereka pergi ke Kupang pada kali yang kedua.

20. Are the ordinals etymologically clearly related to cardinals? e.g. Indonesian ordinal pertama is not derived from cardinal satu.

21. Are there any words that are used like ordinals but have no numeral or ordinal root?

22. Plural marking: Is plural marked with an affix?

23. Does the language have a plural word? E.g. non 'PLURAL' in Teiwa.

A plural word is a morpheme whose meaning and function is similar to that of plural affixes in other languages, but which is a separate word that functions as a modifier of the noun. Plural words are overrepresented in isolating or analytic languages, in languages with classifiers, and in headmarking languages (cf. M. Dryer, Plural words,

Questions 24-29 only apply when the language has a plural word:

24. If the language has a plural word, do you observe any animacy or size effects in the use of the plural word? Check:

 orang perempuan

 kakak perempuan

 anak laki-laki

 babi, anjing

 tikus, burung

 nyamuk, semut, lebah, lalat 361 M. batu kecil, jarum, kancing

 kendi, panci, mok

 batu karang, pohon kelapa

 rumah 25. Plural words as 'numerals': Can plural word and numeral co-occur? (If so, this could be evidence that they belong to different categories.)

26. Can plural word and non-numeral quantifiers (beberapa, semua, sedikit, banyak) co-occur?

27. Can plural word and possessor noun co-occur?

28. Can plural word and possessive prefix co-occur?

29. Plural words are reported to derive from e.g. third person plural pronoun, plural article, words meaning all or many, nouns meaning group or set, classifier, etc. Do you have ideas about the possible diachronic origin of the plural word in the language of study?

30. Quantifiers (non-numeral) semua, banyak, sedikit, beberapa What does the quantifier inventory look like for

 Countable objects-orang, babi, anjing, rumah, kursi, gelas

 Uncountable objects or masses-garam, gula, air, nasi, jagung (?), semut, lebah, lalat,-gunung-gunung (?), awan-awan (?)