Ata pn di 3act

3.rec-scrape-dur 'A. scratches himself (intentionally). 'In the video elicitation tasks, non-volitional S's are expressed only with a prefix. An example of this is given inThe free pronoun di is probably of verbal origin and has grammaticalized from the auxiliary d 'hold'). Participants marked with di are mainly humans, but nonhuman participants of considerable agentive force, e.g., a storm, are also possible.

10 Participant marking: Corpus study and video elicitation

In the responses to the video elicitation task, -type prefixes were exclusively used in the descriptions of one-participant events. In each case the prefix crossreferences the sole participant in the event denoted by the verb. Prefixes of the -type are used with non-volitional S's, namely the S of minang 'wake up', liel 'tall', lal 'laugh', kaai 'stumble', and yongf 'forget' (which was employed in descriptions of the sleep event [i.e., video clip C05_sleep_11]). Speakers also very consistently used -type prefixes with volitional S's with the two positional verbs ruid 'rise, stand up' and reek 'lie'.

However, just looking at the effect of volitionality alone on the coding in the experiment does not give us a clear picture. The proportions for non-volitional and volitional S's are about equal (see

The impact of non-volitionality becomes more obvious when one looks at nonvolitional animate S's. Of all S's in one-place predicates, non-volitional animate S's are most likely to be indexed

In Abui animate S's that are non-volitional are indexed with a prefix for an average of 69% of the cases, whereas animate S's (55%), volitional animate S's (46%), and inanimate (and thus by definition non-volitional) S's (9%) show much lower proportions. This pattern may have a functional explanation, in that use of prefixation encodes information that the default expectation is not met that an animate participant is volitional.

Sebastian Fedden & Dunstan Brown

In sum, Abui has a high degree of semantic fluidity, and prefixation patterns depend on the factors affectedness and volitionality. We now turn to the neighbouring language Kamang, in which arbitrary inflection classes (at least synchronically) play a larger role than in Abui.

Kamang, like Abui, has semantic alignment and several prefix series. However, in Kamang the actual use of prefixes differs radically from Abui. Kamang is more restricted in terms of the possible combinations of verbs with prefixes than Abui. More than in Abui, lexical classes in Kamang play an important role in determining prefixation patterns of the S in intransitive clauses and the P in transitive clauses. We have based our analysis of Kamang on a corpus of 510 verbs (Schapper, Kamang corpus;). In Kamang the primary verb class divide is between:

(i) Obligatorily prefixed verbs: These require a prefix on the verb in order to be well-formed. The prefix comes from one of the six series, is lexically fixed for each verb and does not alternate. For verbs in this group the different prefixal inflections have no obvious semantic functions, but rather define arbitrary inflection classes. Of the 510 verbs in the corpus, 166 are obligatorily prefixed (approx. 33%).

(ii) Non-obligatorily prefixed verbs: These do not require a prefix. Where prefixes are added to these verbs they have semantically transparent functions. Prefixation can either be argument-preserving, whereby prefixation of the verb does not add another argument or alter the valency of the verb, or argument-adding, whereby the prefix indexes an additional argument. 344 verbs belong into this class (approx. 67%).that there is a substantial difference in the prefixal requirements of transitive and intransitive verbs (all percentages rounded to whole num422 10 Participant marking: Corpus study and video elicitation bers). In the classification of verbs as either intransitive or transitive we follow

Almost half of the transitive verbs that we sampled from the corpus are obligatorily prefixed, whereas substantially fewer of the intransitive verbs (only 20%) are.

5.2.1 Inflection classes in Kamang

As noted, one third of the verbs in Kamang are obligatorily prefixed and fall into arbitrary inflection classes. All of these verbs require a prefix and the prefix series is lexically fixed and independent of verb semantics.presents the percentages of obligatorily prefixed intransitive verbs across inflection classes. The prefix indexes S. Well over half occur in the pat inflection, whereas less than one fifth goes in each of the loc and gen inflection classes. The remainder is made up of the ast class. There are no instances of obligatorily prefixed intransitive verbs outside these four inflection classes.presents the percentages of obligatorily prefixed transitive verbs across inflection classes (rounded to whole numbers). The prefix indexes P. Over half of these verbs belong to the loc inflection, while roughly 35% are in the pat inflection. The remainder is made up by a handful of transitive verbs from the other four inflections.