The pTNG form for 'to come' is also strikingly similar to the pAP, but the pAP form may have its origins in Proto-Malayo Polynesian *maRi, which is irregularly reflected as ma or mai in many Austronesian languages in the region, for example Mambai (Timor) ma, Manggarai (Flores) mai.

The pTNG reconstruction *wani 'who' looks similar to the Abui form hanin that was cited in Pawley (n.d.), but more recent research on Abui shows that 'who' is maa, and we know of no word hanin in Abui. The AP languages Adang, Hamap, and Kabola, all quite closely related, show somewhat similar forms, but the lack of correspondence in the initial consonants, combined with the limited geographic distribution, make these unlikely cognates.

(53) pTNG *wani, Adang (AP) ano, Hamap (AP) hano, Kabola (AP) hanado 'who'

A further two proposed cognates are simply not very similar in form to their putative TAP reflexes. The pTNG form *pululu 'fly, flutter' was originally considered cognate with Blagar (AP) iriri, alili, but our data show Blagar liri, and other cognates point to proto-Alor *liri. The competing form pAP *jira(n) has a wider distribution and is therefore reconstructed to pAP. Proto-Timor *lore suggests that Alor-Pantar *liri is older than previously assumed, but at any rate, the initial consonant from pTNG is only found in one TAP language (Fataluku (Tim) ipile). It seems much more likely that the resemblance between pTNG and the TAP languages is due to onomatopoeia.

Likewise, further data on pTNG reconstructions for 'urine' cast doubt on the purported cognacy with TAP languages. The pTNG *[si]si, *siti, *pisi 'urine' was originally considered cognate with Oirata (Tim) iri 'urine, excrement'. The forms in the AP languages seem to be doublets with 'water', which is reconstructed as pTAP *jira. Although we have not established TAP correspondences for pTNG *s, there is insufficient formal similarity between the two reconstructions to retain them as cognate sets.

In terms of lexicon, then, we are left with thirteen potential pTNG-TAP cognates and a few tentative sound correspondences

5 Comparison with individual languages

In the preceding section we examined evidence for a connection between TAP and TNG drawing on data from a top-down reconstruction of pTNG. Given that Pawley's putative TNG contains some five hundred languages, and that little historical reconstruction work has been done for lower level subgroups, pTNG reconstructions must be considered tentative (though some reconstructed forms are more secure than others). Hence, it is useful also to examine potential relationships of TAP directly with lower level subgroups. We focus here on four such families. The first, South Bird's Head (SBH), is not actually included in Pawley's TNG but was included inprevious formulation of TNG. This classification is detailed in, who along withargues for a somewhat distant ("subphylic") connection between TAP and SBH.

The other three families considered here are all classified within Pawley's TNG. The Dani and Wissel Lakes families were part of the original core group of TNG languages proposed by Wurm,Their membership in TNG is likely quite secure. The other TNG family considered here is West Bomberai. Like SBH, West Bomberai was originally classified byas part of the West Papuan Phylum, but it was later reclassified as TNG and included as such by Pawley.also includes West Bomberai within TNG based on pronominal evidence. In fact, Ross proposes a "West Trans-New Guinea linkage" within TNG consisting of West Bomberai, Dani, Wissel Lakes, and TAP. All of these languages, including the Timor languages (but notably excluding Alor-Pantar) share an innovation whereby the pTNG first singular pronoun *na is replaced by ani.also notes that the TAP languages share with West Bomberai an innovative first-person plural form *bi (though this is an inclusive pronoun in TAP but an exclusive pronoun in West Bomberai).

In the following sub-sections we compare TAP languages to each of these four families in turn, while remaining agnostic as to the status of TAP vis-à-vis TNG. Since we lack robust reconstructions at the level of any of these families, we instead compare pTAP reconstructions (see Chapter 3) to selected individual languages from each of these families.

5.1 South Bird's Head

The South Bird's Head family is here represented by Inanwatan (ISO 639-3 szp) and Kokoda (ISO 639-3 xod). The Inanwatan pronouns are given in(with pAP for comparison). Like the pAP and pTNG pronoun sets, these show /a/ in the singulars and /i/ in the plurals, although the Inanwatan third person 173 Gary Holton & Laura C. Robinson singular does not follow this pattern. These are similar to the pAP pronouns in reflecting *na '1sg' instead of *an. As in the TAP languages, the pTNG first person plural pronoun *ni (if indeed Inanwatan is a TNG language) has been assigned to the exclusive, and a new form has been innovated for the inclusive. The inclusive form in Inanwatan, however, is not cognate with the inclusive in pAP. Inanwatan is also different from TAP languages in distinguishing between masculine and feminine in the third person singular.