Additionally, genetic studies indicate that East Nusantara, and the Alor-Pantar region in particular, is a melting pot with a long history of admixture (, and it may well be that an analogous situation holds for languages, reflecting extensive borrowing and metatypy. Thus it is not surprising that different methods reveal different trees for the family.

The family tree based on phonological innovations identified by the comparative methodshows the highest level of diversity on Pantar, suggesting the languages originated in Pantar, spreading east. The tree based on the lexical characters (suggests that the languages of Alor originated in the Pantar Strait (around the area where Blagar is spoken today) with subsequent migration eastward. These two trees reveal different aspects of the prehistory of the AP languages. Phonological innovations show the greatest degree of diversity on Pantar, suggesting a long history of settlement there. Lexical innovations are compatible with an original settlement in the Pantar Strait. We propose that the original settlement was indeed in the area of the Pantar Strait with a very early split towards Pantar. That early settlement of Pantar led to the diversity we see there in terms of phonological innovations. The lexical innovations show less diversity on Pantar due to subsequent diffusion (as indicated by the significant reticulation for the languages of Pantar in). As languages spread eastward from the Pantar Strait into Alor, new lexical innovations were restricted to smaller and smaller subgroups in the east, leading to the embedded structure in the tree based on lexical charactersHowever, the Pantar Strait languages (particularly Blagar and Adang) constitute a more recent linguistic area across which phonological innovations have been shared, leading to their close subgrouping in the tree based on phonological innovations

While this picture is fairly complex in terms of layers of history, it is not unexpected in a region of significant warfare and shifting alliances overlaid by sev-Gary Holton & Laura C. Robinson eral periods of contact from different outside groups (first the ancestors of today's Muslim speakers of Alorese, then the Dutch, and now Indonesian). A more complete picture of the prehistory of the region must await evidence from other disciplines, particularly archaeology and genetics.

Cognate sets

Here we list 129 cognate sets reflecting regular sound correspondences. There are only 127 distinct meanings, as two of the meanings, 'dog' and 'walk', are found in more than one cognate set; these are indicated with subscripts following the gloss. In the table the correspondence sets are listed alphabetically by English gloss. Languages are arranged in order roughly from west to east with the western-most languages on the left and the eastern-most languages on the right. Correspondence sets may include irregular forms when they serve to demonstrate the correspondence under discussion. In these cases the irregular forms are denoted with a preceding double dagger ( ). We reconstruct pAP forms only when we have broad geographic support in minimally one language of Pantar (Teiwa, Nedebang, Kaera, Western Pantar), one language of West Alor and the Pantar Strait (Blagar, Adang, Klon, Kui), and one language of East Alor (Abui, Kamang, Sawila, Wersing). Of these 129 correspondences, 117 reconstruct to the level of pAP.

2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family

The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language familyIn this chapter, we present a preliminary demonstration of the relatedness of the Timor-Alor-Pantar family based on a comparison of these two reconstructions. We identify a number of regular consonant correspondences across cognate vocabulary between the two groups and reconstruct a list of 89 proto-TAP roots.

1 Introduction

This chapter looks at the historical relationship between the Papuan languages of Alor-Pantar (AP) and those of Timor-Kisar (TK). The TK group of Papuan languages consists of Bunaq, spoken in central Timor; Makasae, Makalero and Fataluku, three languages spoken in a contiguous region of far eastern Timor; and Oirata, spoken on the southern side of Kisar Island to the north of Timor. Due to their geographical proximity, AP and TK languages have typically been assumed to be related to one another (e.g.,). Together they have Antoinette Schapper, Juliette Huber & Aone van Engelenhoven been referred to as the Timor-Alor-Pantar (TAP) family. However, there has been no substantive data-driven investigation of the claim of relatedness.

In this chapter, we test the hypothesis that AP and TK languages are related to one another through the application of the comparative method. Specifically, we compare the results of two recent reconstructions, the one of AP () and the other of TKWe establish that the AP and TK languages are indeed related by demonstrating that there are regular sound correspondences across cognate vocabulary between the two groups.

In comparingin this chapter, we assume the existence of two nodes in the TAP tree, namely Proto-Alor-Pantar (pAP) and Proto-Timor (pTIM). Whilst pAP appears to be a robust node, the existence of pTIM is less secure. As