As the AlorPantar languages have APV and SV word order any overt A or S precedes the verb.(1) (noun phrase k /free pronoun k ) prefix k-verb(2) (noun phrase/free pronoun) verb

We concentrate in this chapter on animacy and volitionality since these were varied systematically in the video stimuli. We also discuss affectedness and its impact on indexation in Kamang and Abui. As affectedness is a complex issue (Tsunoda 1985; Beavers 2011) we decided to exclude it as a factor from the video elicitation task when we were designing the video stimuli.

Similar factors to those found in constructions involving pronominal prefixes in the Alor-Pantar languages have been reported for differential object marking, including animacy, specificity, and affectednessVolitionality is, among other things, argued to play a role in differential subject marking in Hindi

In § 2 and § 3 we briefly sketch the systems of syntactic and semantic alignment in Abui, Kamang and Teiwa, and discuss the number of prefix series that one finds in these languages, respectively. In § 4 we discuss our video elicitation method. We discuss the effects of animacy and volitionality in § 5. Teiwa does not use indexing to directly represent information about events and participants but relies strongly on verb classes, conventionally associated with animacy, but also with a high degree of arbitrary stipulation. Although verb classes also play a role in Abui and Kamang, indexing in these languages is used to directly encode information about events and participants, such as volitionality and affectedness in Abui, and affectedness in Kamang. Finally in § 6, we summarize and give a conclusion of our findings.

Sebastian Fedden & Dunstan Brown

2 Alignment

The person prefixes found on the verbs in the Alor-Pantar languages are all very similar in form, pointing to a common historical origin.However, pronominal indexing is conditioned by a variety of constraints which differ between the languages. Teiwa, a language of Pantar, has syntactic alignment (accusative), whereas both Kamang, from eastern Alor, and Abui, from central western Alor, have semantic alignment. Although there is no case marking on noun phrases, alignment can be defined relative to pronominal indexing.

For almost all Teiwa verbs the following holds: only P's are indexed whereas S's and A's are never indexed. There is a small subset of three reflexive-like verbs which index the S (see below). Generally, therefore, Teiwa treats S like A and unlike P and can be said to have syntactic alignment of the accusative type. In Abui and Kamang P's are also indexed, as are more patient-like S's (S P ), while more agent-like S's (S A ) are not indexed. As in Teiwa, A's are not indexed. Such systems in which S's behave differently depending on semantic factors are generally called semantic alignment systemsor active/agentive systems

The Alor-Pantar languages are of interest at the macro-typological level for a number of reasons. First, the nominative-accusative alignment system in Teiwa's prefixal marking is typologically the most common), yet in Teiwa it is associated with the rare property of marking only the person of the P on the verb (Siewierska 2013). Second, the Alor-Pantar languages which have semantic alignment are subject to differing semantic factors in determining their pronominal indexing, including animacy, volitionality and affectedness. These are, of course, implicated in many phenomena of a wider macrotypological interest.

For almost all Teiwa verbs, S's are encoded with a free pronoun, as illustrated in (3) and (4).

10 Participant marking: Corpus study and video elicitation While volitionality as a term suggests that it is exclusively a property of a human (or at least an animate) participant it is typically not a property of the lexical semantics of nouns that they are volitional or non-volitional agents. Nouns such as person, child, or man can be used in contexts in which they may be subject to non-volitional acts (e.g., fall) or volitional ones (e.g., walk), while they remain constant in their values for animacy. This means that a distinction on the basis of volitionality would not yield an exhaustive partition of the lexicon in the way that the animate-inanimate opposition would. Typically, volitionality is a property of a participant which is observed in the context of an event. In this sense we can attribute it to the event as a whole. Volitionality as we use it here (or the absence thereof) is more likely a part of the lexical semantics of verbs, as can be seen in examples like 'stumble', 'trip', 'fall', and 'vomit'. But, as with the noun examples mentioned, it is possible to find verbs where there is no requirement that their lexical semantics are committed to a value for volitionality. This entails that, while volitionality may be relevant for some verbs such as the ones we mention, it does not partition the verb lexicon in the way that animacy partitions the noun lexicon. Animacy, on the other hand, is a lexical property. As