Morphologically, AP cardinals above 'six' consist of minimally two formatives. Additive base-five forms involve two (reflexes of) numerals and no marker for addition. Subtractive base-ten forms involve a numeral and an unanalysable initial element that appears to go back to a morpheme originally meaning something like 'less' or 'take away'. With one exception, the numerals 'ten' are compounds of 'ten' and 'one', and the decades are formed accordingly. Numerals 'one hundred' and 'one thousand' are structured in the same way, expressing multiplication of the base with juxtaposed numerals in which the highest numeral precedes 309 Antoinette Schapper & Marian Klamer the lowest. Numerals in between decades are expressed as phrases, involving an additive operator (proto-AP *wali() 'add, (do) again').

Typologically, the constellations of numerals 'six' through 'nine' in AP represent two rare patterns. The first rarity is the combination of a mono-morphemic 'six' with quinary forms 'seven' through 'nine' found in many languages across the two islands, and reconsructed to proto-AP. The second rarity is the occurrence of subtractive base-ten systems alongside a monomorphemic 'six' as found in the Straits-West-Alor languages. Typologically interesting are the mathematically 'incorrect' numerals found in some of the languages: a 'seven' that mathematically should be 'four' (Straits-West Alor), a 'seven' and 'eight' that mathematically should be 'nine' and 'ten' (Western Pantar), and an 'eight' that would literally translate as 'minus four' in Kui. These forms all arose through reanalysis of the numeral value of the base as different from its etymological source. Finally, it is of typological interest to consider the non-numeral lexemes that are incorporated into AP numerals: the (ad)verbs 'less' and 'take away' as part of subtractive numerals; mi-, an originally locative morpheme deriving decades; and the word 'single' standing in for the numeral 'one' in compound numerals for 'six'.

Historically, this study has provided information on the numeral system of proto-AP, and additional details on affiliations and distinctions between members of the AP group that may be used as evidence to construct particular subgroups within the family. The proto-AP numeral system was a mixed quinary and decimal system, with a monomorphemic 'six' (i.e. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, [5 2], [5 3], [5 4], [10 1]). The arithmetic operations involved were addition and multiplication. Over time, the system was complicated by reorganizations of patterns as well as borrowings of numeral bases, or patterns, or both. As a result, some modern languages have introduced subtractive procedures instead of, or along with, addition and multiplication. Some languages incorporated non-numeral formatives into their numerals. Numeral forms were reconstructed to different nodes in the AP family, as summarized inThe table is to be read from left to right. The left-most column represents the oldest numeral forms, that is, those that can be reconstructed to proto-AP. Numerals 'one' through 'six' in this proto-language were monomorphemic forms, while 'seven' through 'nine' were regular quinary forms. The right-hand columns represent numeral innovations which can be reconstructed to different subgroups of the AP family.7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages

Translated into a tree, the reconstruction of numerals in AP languages yields the structure in

We see that that there are patterns and forms found in the Pantar languages (except Western Pantar) are clearly separate from those in the languages of Alor; the Straits West Alor languages (Blagar, Reta, Kabola, Adang, Hamap, Klon) share patterns and forms amongst themselves that are not shared with other AP languages; and we argued the same to be the case for the languages of central and east Alor. The subgrouping membership of the Kui and Western Pantar is problematic; their grouping within pSWA is tentative and rests on their possessing some innovative morphemes (i.e., reflexes of *uti-and *tukari) in common with the main Straits-West Alor languages proper, though with different functions in Kui and Western Pantar.

The preliminary reconstruction of Proto-AP based on sound changes as reported infocuses on showing the relatedness of all AP languages. Little work has been done on the sound changes defining lower-level subgroups of AP languages. Nevertheless, there are some correspondences that can be observed. For instance, the pSWA subgroup we define (without the problematic inclusion of Kui and Western Pantar) is also supported by the sound change *s > h. Further study of lower level sound changes is needed to test whether all the subgroups we posit here on the basis of the morphological evidence of numerals are valid.