Similarly, apparent reflexes of final *w are better analyzed as reflecting original vowels. For example, Western Pantar lau, Adang loi/lohu, Abui lou, Sawila lu, and Wersing aloi 'bark' (v.). Without additional supporting evidence we do not reconstruct *w in final position.

The initial reflexes of the palatal glide *j are relatively straightforward once a few simple rules are taken into account. In Kaera, Blagar, Adang, Kui, Kamang, Sawila, and Wersing the reflex of *j is lost before a high front vowelIn Western Pantar, it becomes h in the same environment. Thus, Teiwa jas, Kaera jas-, Western Pantar jasa < pAP *jasi 'bad, broken'; but before a high front vowel Teiwa jir, Kaera ir, Kamang ili < *jira 'water'. Correspondence sets supporting initial *j include 'water', 'bad', 'dog 1 ', 'five', 'star', and 'laugh'.

In Kui er 'water' subsequent vowel quality changes have obliterated the environment which triggered loss of *j. Nedebang and Adang lose the initial syllable of 'dog 1 ' because the form had final stress and in those languages the initial unstressed syllable was lost. Wersing weti 'five' irregularly begins with w instead of j.

We do not reconstruct *j in non-initial position. Where non-initial j is found in modern languages we assume this is a reflex of a vowel. Examples include Nedebang buja 'betel nut' < *bui.

2.7 Reconstructed proto-Alor-Pantar vocabulary

Since the focus of our reconstruction is on the consonants, the vowels in the reconstructed vocabulary should be interpreted with caution. We do not make any strong claim regarding the nature of the pAP vowel system.

Having reconstructed the consonant system we can proceed with a reconstruction of pAP vocabulary. Although we identify 129 distinct lexical correspondences in our data set, not all correspondences are widely attested across the full range of languages. We reconstruct vocabulary items only when reflexes can 8 A capital V stands for a vowel, where it is unclear which vowel should be reconstructed.Several AP languages show medial /g/ or reflexes of medial *g in 'laugh', leading Schapper, Huber & Engelenhoven (this volume) to reconstruct pAP *jagir. We find that the correspondences for this medial consonant are highly irregular, and therefore appear to indicate borrowing rather than inheritance. On the other hand, a number of languages unproblematically reflect *jari, so we reconstruct pAP *jari as opposed to *jagir. See the Appendix for a full list of words.Schapper, Huber & Engelenhoven (this volume) reconstruct 'new' as *siba(r) with an optional final *r. In the Timor languages, the final /r/ is found in Makalero. In the modern AP languages, only Adang has a final /r/, but the Adang reflex of pAP *r is either /l/ or /i/, so we find insufficient evidence to reconstruct 'new' with a final *r at this time.

Gary Holton & Laura C. Robinson be found in at least one language of Pantar (Teiwa, Nedebang, Kaera, Western Pantar), one language of West Alor and the Pantar Strait (Blagar, Adang, Klon, Kui), and one language of East Alor (Abui, Kamang, Sawila, Wersing). We exclude from reconstruction very obvious recent borrowings, such as 'maize', but we include some forms which are older Austronesian borrowings, such as 'pig', 'betel nut', and 'betel vine'. We know that these items/animals were introductions that roughly coincide with the arrival of the Austronesian (AN) languages in the area. 11lists 117 vocabulary items which can be reconstructed at the level of pAP on the basis of the correspondence sets above. A full list of the correspondence sets with modern reflexes can be found in the Appendix.

Based on what we know of the phonotactics of the daughter languages, and on the reconstructed pAP vocabulary, we posit a (C)V(C) syllable structure for pAP, with (C)VC or CV(C) as the minimal structure for a single word. In particular, while many of the daughter languages permit words consisting of a single vowel (e.g., Western Pantar a 'tuber'), the reconstructed pAP vocabulary does not contain such forms, although syllables consisting of a single vowel may occur in polysyllabic words. Similarly, while some of the modern languages admit consonant clusters in word-initial onsets, which involve a second liquid second consonant (e.g., Teiwa bluking 'arrow', Western Pantar bro 'dust'), no consonant clusters are reconstructed for pAP. Underived words in pAP are typically no more than three syllables in length.

3 Internal subgrouping

In this section we consider two approaches to explaining the internal relationships of the Alor-Pantar languages. The first is based on the traditional concept of shared phonological innovations. This method robustly identifies shared history, but because the innovations cross-cut one another this method requires subjective weighting of the various innovations. We thus consider also a second less traditional approach based on computational phylogenetics applied to the lexical dataset. Here we apply two methods: split decomposition and Bayesian