, together with the pTNG) and pNH (Wada 1980) pronouns. Note that North Halmaheran pronouns are reconstructed in two forms corresponding to actor ("subject") and undergoer ("object").

Several structural differences are noticeable between these pronoun sets. First, AP and NH show an inclusive/exclusive distinction in first person plural which is not found in TNG. This has been argued to be an areal feature resulting from Austronesian influenceSecond, NH but not AP or TNG distinguish gender in third person pronouns. Third, a distributive pronoun is found only in AP.

We consider first the TNG pronouns. The pTNG pronominal reconstructions provide what some consider to be the strongest support for the genealogical connection between AP and TNGBoth pTNG and pAP show a paradigmatic distinction between a in the singular and i in the plural. However, the correspondence is problematic due to the mismatch between the second and third person pronouns. Proto-TNG shows velar consonants in the second person forms, while pAP shows velar consonants in the third person forms. It has been suggested that the pTNG second person pronouns could have developed into the pAP second person pronouns by lenition of pTNG *g > *g > *k > h. While this is possible, we find stronger evidence that the pTNG prenasalized obstruents should correspond to the pAP voiced stops (see ยง 4.2), if indeed the two are related at all.

Another possible scenario connecting these two paradigms is to posit a flipflop between the second and third person pronouns, as inAs far as we are aware, such an inversion scenario was first proposed by

(32) Putative flip-flop between second and third person pronouns

This leaves only the fricative in the pAP second person forms unexplained, but external evidence from the Timor languages suggests that perhaps the pAP second person forms should be vowel initial (i.e., pAP *a '2sg' and *i '2pl'). While it is not impossible that the pAP pronouns descend from the pTNG pronouns in this way, connecting the two requires us to posit a flip which makes the correspondence much less striking.

The putative correspondence between the pAP and pTNG pronouns leaves at least one AP form unexplained: the AP distributive *ta-has no correspondent form in TNG.posits a connection between the AP distributive and the pNH first-singular active form *to-. According to this hypothesis the resemblance between the AP distributive and the pNH first-singular active is evidence not of a genealogical relationship but rather a borrowing relationship within a contact area encompassing the Bomberai Peninsula and South Bird's Head region. The semantic plausibility of this connection is based on an analysis of *ta-as the minimal 1/2-person pronoun in a minimal-augmented system). However, the augmented counterpart is filled anomalously by 163 Gary Holton & Laura C. Robinson *pi-, rather than the expected *ti-, though pAP *pi-does show striking semantic and structural similarity with pNH first person inclusive *po-. Yet in the modern Alor-Pantar languages, reflexes of *ta-, where they exist, have a clear distributive function. For example, compare the Adang first person plural inclusive (33a) with the distributive (33b).

The distributive function is expressed quite differently in NH languages. In Tobelo the distributive is expressed with the verb prefix koki-(34) rather than with a pronoun.

(34) Tobelo (NH; Holton 2003)

ma-homoa nm-other

'Each of the others died. '

The AP distributive prefix is extra-paradigmatic: it does not show the vowel grading found in the other prefixes; and related independent pronouns are either absent or of limited distribution. This suggests that the pAP distributive has a distinct history from that of the other pAP pronominal forms, and that the resemblance between pNH *to '1sg' and pAP *ta '1pl.dist' is coincidental.

The structural features of the pronominal systems are compared inIt is apparent that the AP pronominal system as a whole has relatively little in common with TNG and NH.

Given the rather speculative nature of the second-third person inversion hypothesis, the pronominal evidence does not provide very strong support for either the TNG or NH hypothesis. Nevertheless, the formal correspondence in first-person forms between AP and TNG provide tentative support for a connection between TAP and TNG.

4 The linguistic position of the Timor-Alor-Pantar languages

When combined with evidence from morphological paradigms, such as pronouns, lexical evidence based on regular sound correspondences is usually considered to be compelling evidence for positing genealogical relationships between languages. Unfortunately, very little in the way of lexical evidence had been previously considered in assessing the wider genealogical relationships of the TAP languages beforeWe consider first the lexical evidence for the NH hypothesis and then the lexical evidence for the TNG hypothesis.

4.1 Lexical evidence for the NH hypothesis

The lexical evidence for a connection between TAP and NH languages is not particularly convincing. In a list of 92 basic vocabulary terms, Capell identifies 11 which seem to show "common roots" with AP languages