In Abui marriage between cross-cousins is tolerated in present Abui society, but as in Adang the practice is not venerated or preferred. In fact, several Abui adages suggest that there may have once been a stronger taboo against crosscousin marriage. Even today, when cross-cousins desire to marry each other they are referred to as hiyeng akuta 'your eyes are blind', hiyeng awai tuk 'you have lime in your eyes', and hiyeng hoopa naha 'you don't have eyes'.

In Kamang marriage between cross-cousins is strictly prohibited. This situation is unique among the Alor-Pantar languages, and Kamang speakers are keenly aware of this uniqueness. In discussing this marriage taboo, Kamang speakers describe the closeness of the lammi-malemi relationship as wee makaa, literally 'bitter blood'. In other words, the blood of lammi and malemi is too close for marriage. Relations between lammi and malemi are highly prescribed. Lammi loves malemi as one would love one's adult child, while malemi must respect lammi as an adult child would respect their parents.

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

5 Discussion

Having compared kinship systems across eight different Alor-Pantar languages, we are left with the question of what the original kinship system looked like in proto-Alor-Pantar. Given the preliminary nature of these data, much of the following discussion is necessarily speculative; however, it is grounded in observed facts and at least describes a plausible historical pathway which has given rise to the current diversity in kinship systems across the Alor-Pantar languages.

Given the importance of cross-cousins and mother's brother in the modern languages, our search for a common origin should naturally begin with these and related terms. As we saw in ยง 3, very little kinship vocabulary is reconstructable at the level of pAP, and this is especially true for cross-cousin terms. Among those languages which obligatorily distinguish cross-cousins from siblings (see), no clear correspondences emerge. Teiwa-ian 'cross-cousin' may well be derived from-ianqai 'brother', or vice-versa (cf. qai 'only'). Blagar-ebheang 'cross-cousin' shows some similarity with Alorese (Austronesian) opung 'cross-cousin' and hence may be a loan (note also the optional Wersing term-beng 'same-sex cross-cousin'). Western Pantar-baddang and Blagar-boromung, both meaning 'opposite-sex cross-cousin', may well be cognate, though the correspondence of a geminate stop with a rhotic is irregular. Note that Teiwa also has-bruman 'marriageable cross-cousin', though the form-dias is used more commonly, and-bruman cannot be used as a vocative.

Among those languages which do not obligatorily distinguish cross-cousins (see), we find two patterns. Kiraman, Abui, Kamang and Wersing employ terms for cross-cousins which are built from the word for 'male' or 'female' plus a modifier. The male terms indicate mother's brother's side, i.e., MBC; the female terms indicate father's sister's side, i.e., FZC. However, the choice of modifier differs in each language. Kiraman uses geta 'trunk'; Abui uses fala 'house'; Kamang uses mi 'located'; and Wersing uses deng 'side'. Thus, while no form for MBC or FZC can be reconstructed, the pattern of deriving these terms from 'male' and 'female' is shared across the three languages. The fifth language, Adang, does not use 'male' and 'female' but instead distinguishes the mother's brother's side as asel, based on sel 'trunk'. Adang has no special term for FZC. This suggests that the practice of naming cross-cousins using terms derived from 'male' and 'female' may have diffused across these languages.

The lack of a clearly reconstructable cross-cousin term in both those languages which obligatorily distinguish cross-cousins and those which do not suggests that the cross-cousin concept has diffused recently, with terminology innovated differently in the different languages-especially in those languages which now obligatorily distinguish cross-cousins (with the possible exception of Blagarebheang and Wersing-beng, which may be related). In those languages not only do the terms for cross-cousin differ, but the distribution of terms across gender categories differs as well. Teiwa and Blagar have both a general cross-cousin term and a special "marriageable" term for opposite-sex cross-cousins. Western Pantar and Wersing have no general term but do distinguish same-sex versus oppositesex cross-cousins. In Western Pantar same-sex cross-cousins are distinguished for gender (man's male cross-cousin versus woman's female cross-cousin), while in Wersing it is the opposite-sex cross-cousins which are distinguished for gender. Clearly if we are to look for some point of common origin we must look to the five languages which only optionally distinguish cross-cousins.