(1) 'high': refers to any location situated up(ward of) the deictic centre;

'low': refers to any location situated down(ward of) the deictic centre; 'level': refers to any location situated level with the deictic centre.

There are very different ways in which an entity can be 'high', 'low' or 'level' relative to the deictic centre. The most sophisticated typology of this is set out inHe identifies three kinds of systems

Global elevation projects general search domains above or below the level of the deictic centre, with an axis from the deictic centre to the referent can but need not be strictly vertical (e.g., there anywhere above, below, etc.) Verticality projects very narrow search domains along a truly vertical axis running at a right angle through the deictic centre, invoking a sense of exactly above/overhead or below/underneath (e.g., there straight up, there directly below, etc.) Geophysical elevation projects search domains which restrict themselves to elevation as manifested in features of the geophysical environment and are not used to refer to the vertical dimension in general (e.g., there uphill, there downstream, etc.)

Antoinette Schapper

The AP languages have, for the most part, systems of global elevation. There are languages in which geophysics plays a role in mapping the elevation system onto the landscape, but this does not limit the systems from referring to locations as, for instance, only uphill or downhill. An example of this comes from Wersing: in this, elevational motion verbs-a 'go.low' and-mid 'go.high' are often translated by speakers as 'go towards the sea' and 'go towards the mountains'. However, it does not follow that this is a geophysical system, since when we move speakers to a non-coastal environment, the verbs can still be applied despite the absence of the sea-land dichotomy in physical geography. In addition, AP languages may also incorporate elements of other elevational types into otherwise globally elevated systems. In ยง 3.5, we will see that, whilst Adang marks only global elevation in its elevationals, demonstratives and elevational motion verbs, it also has a special set of directional elevationals containing dedicated geophysical elevation terms as well as extra elevation terms in the high domain marked for different degrees of verticality. Two languages, Western Pantar and Kamang, also incorporate the steepness of the slope into their elevational systems, which in essence is also a means of distinguishing greater or lesser degrees of verticality in elevational deixis.

In several AP languages which I will discuss, elevation-marked terms occur in paradigms with terms that are not marked for elevation. I refer to any term in a paradigm with elevation-marked terms which is not marked for elevation as 'unelevated'. For those that are elevation-marked, I use the label 'elevated'. Note that I avoid describing elevated terms as "distal" as compared to the unelevated terms with which they occur in paradigms. Elevated terms, in many instances, seem to form a separate system that contrasts with their unelevated counterparts in terms of speech participant-anchoring. This means that, whereas unelevated terms take one of their speech participants (speaker or addressee) as the deictic centre, elevated terms refer to locations relative to the speech situation as a whole. However, on account of their only vague locational reference, they are not typically used in relation to items that are very close to a speaker. Labels such as "distal" (dist) and "proximal" (prox) as well as "addressee-anchored" (addr) and "speaker-anchored" (spkr) will be used only in reference to unelevated terms.The terms 'near' and 'far' are used instead for the few occasions in which we find distance-related distinctions between elevated terms.

Finally, I use the term "elevational" to refer to the sets of non-verbal items denoting a location that is at a certain elevation relative to the deictic centre.

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages I use the term "locational" to refer to paradigms of elevated and unelevated terms referring to locations. This means, elevated locationals are "elevationals", while unelevated locationals are functional equivalents to such items as English "here" and "there". However, I avoid the common label given to these ("demonstrative adverbs", as, e.g., in Diessel 1999) since locationals in AP languages are not typically restricted to adverbial positions, but can often also occur as predicates and in NPs. I reserve the term "demonstrative" for an NP constituent that refers to an entity by locating it in space. By contrast, locationals, including elevationals, denote a location relative to which a referent can be identified in space. The morpho-syntax of elevationals in individual languages will be described in ยง 3.

3 Alor-Pantar elevational systems