The presence of base-five numerals for 'seven' through 'nine' in separate groups of the AP languages at opposite ends of the archipelago, coupled with the absence of any other equally widely attested forms for these numerals, is a strong indication that a base-five system was used in proto-AP 'seven' through 'nine'.

The difference between base-five numerals in Pantar and central-east Alor languages is merely in the transparency of formatives in the compound numerals. While in the Pantar group base-five compounds have been reduced to such an extent that they are no longer transparent, the central-east Alor languages have retained base-five as a transparent and productive system.

5.2.2 Subtractive base-ten compounds and extensions

The second strategy of creating numerals 'seven' through 'nine' found in the AP languages is subtraction, that is,for 'seven',for 'eight' andfor 'nine'. This strategy is found in the Straits and West Alor languages.sets out the numerals under discussion in this group along with their reconstructed forms in the ancestor language proto-Straits-West-Alor (pSWA). The final two language in, Kui and Western Pantar, have innovated their own distinctive forms as indicated by the brackets. They are nevertheless included here because, as will be seen in ยง 5.2.3, they both include some of the formatives distinctive of pSWA numerals 'seven' to 'nine'.

The subtractive basis for the formation of Straits-West-Alor numerals 'seven' through 'nine' is evident from the remnants of reflexes of proto-AP *(a)tiga 'three',

Two different subtractive bases are apparent in the modern forms: (i) in 'eight' and 'nine', there is a synchronically unanalysable initial morpheme, which is followed by reflexes of 'two' and 'one', and; (ii) in 'seven', we see an augend that we argue below to be a borrowed reflex of proto-Austronesian *pitu 'seven', with reflexes of 'three' as addend. We discuss these two constructions now in turn.

The unanalysable initial elements in the compounds for 'eight' (*tur-) and 'nine' appear to go back to a single morpheme pre-proto-Straits-West-Alor *tukari, originally meaning something like 'take away'. On this reconstruction, pre-pSWA *tukari was already reduced to *tur-in pSWA 'eight', but maintained in 'nine'. We suggest that *tukari meant 'less' or 'take away' rather than 'ten' for two reasons. First, the reconstructed pAP *qar 'ten') has a distinct form which cannot be reconciled with pre-pSWA *tukari. Second, to assign *tukari the meaning 'ten' would imply that the numerals formed by subtraction would be composed of a simple sequence of the subtrahend and the minuend. This would be a cross-linguistically unusual pattern and is judged to be unlikely here, but by no means impossible.

We analyse these subtractive numerals as originally constructed along the lines of 'ten less one', 'ten less two', and 'ten less three'. However, over time, the numeral overtly denoting 'ten' was dropped and 'less one' was conventionalized to mean 'nine', 'less two' to mean 'eight', and 'less three' to mean 'seven'. In turn, it appears that pre-pSWA *tukari was reanalysed as a subtrahend rather than the actual morpheme expressing the subtraction. This is seen in its replacement by another base in pSWA 'seven', the other subtrahend that is apparent in the modern numerals, *uti-. We propose that this is a borrowed numeral which is a reflex of proto-Austronesian *pitu 'seven'. It is followed by reflexes of pAP *(a)tiga 'three' to denote 'seven', and has replaced the pre-pSWA morpheme *tukari in the numeral 'seven', as laid out in

In other words, Proto-Straits-West-Alor *utitoga is composed of *uti, a borrowed base that is a reflex of PAN *pitu 'seven', conjoined with toga as a reflex of pAP *(a)tiga 'three'. The Straits-West-Alor languages are located along a 292 7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages

The resulting proto-Straits-West-Alor numeral compound 'seven' was, however, a mediation of the contact and the native numeral. By borrowing the numeral for 'seven', the Austronesian pattern was emulated, but by maintaining the original minuend 'three' along with the new Austronesian numeral functioning as subtrahend, the native Straits-West-Alor subtractive pattern was also partially preserved.

Such a rearrangement in which a numeral is formed mathematically incorrectly may appear unusual, but parallels are found in other languages of the area.