) point out, it is possible that Bunaq and the Eastern Timor languages (reconstructed as Proto-ET in Schapper, Huber & Engelenhoven 2012) both form their own separate primary subgroups within TAP. Our aim here is not to make claims about the high-level subgrouping of the AP and TK languages, and we do not presume to definitively determine the constituency of the TK-AP tree at this stage, but merely seek to show that TK and AP languages are related. Conclusive evidence of innovations shared by Bunaq and ET languages to the exclusion of AP languages is the subject of ongoing research.

§ 2 presents the sound correspondences we find in cognate vocabulary between pAP and pTIM. § 3 summarizes our preliminary findings and discusses issues arising out of them. Appendices are included with supporting language data for any reconstructions that do not appear in, as well as a list of pTAP forms that can be reconstructed on the basis of the sound correspondences identified in this chapter. New, additional reconstructions have in some cases been necessary since the two articles each reconstruct only a small number of lexemes with only partial overlap between them. The sources of the lexical data used are listed in the Appendices. We also throw out several cognate sets from the AP reconstruction as they reflect borrowing from Austronesian languages.

2 Sound correspondences

In this section, we describe the consonant correspondences that we have identified between AP and TK languages. We do draw on vowel correspondences where they condition particular sound changes in consonants, but otherwise do 92The relatedness of Timor-Kisar and Alor-Pantar languages not deal with vowels in this preliminary demonstration of relatedness. We chiefly draw attention to the correspondences in cognate vocabulary between pAP and pTIM. However, we provide the reader also with the forms of the lexemes in the TK languages as they are not available elsewhere in this volume. The argumentation and underpinning data for pAP is given inand is based on

In the subsections that follow, transcription of language data adheres to IPA conventions. Long vowels are indicated with a length mark ''. Bracketed segments '( )' are those deemed to be non-etymological, that is, typically reflecting some morpheme which has fossilized on a root. In the correspondence tables, square brackets '[]' are used where an item is cognate but doesn't reflect the segment in question. The inverted question mark '¿' is used where a cognate shows an unexpected reflex of the segment in question. Grammatical items are glossed in small caps. Reconstructions marked with '' are new reconstructions not found in or revised fromThe symbol '' signals that the full data set on which the reconstruction in question is based is given in the Appendices. AP data supporting the additional pAP reconstructions is given in Appendix A.1 and TK data in Appendix A.2. In the text of the chapter itself, for reasons of compactness, we only give simple one-word glosses which reflect the presumed meaning of the protolexeme. Should the reader need more information on semantics, he can refer to the Appendices. We also do not provide information on irregular changes, such as metathesis or apocope, in the correspondence tables, except where directly relevant to the reconstruction of the segment in question. The Appendix provides the reader with fuller information on any irregularities in form or meaning in individual languages.

2.1 Reconstruction of bilabial stops

We identify two robust correspondent sets for bilabial plosives, reconstructing to pTAP *p and *b. Note that in Schapper,, we reconstruct a three-way distinction (*p, *b, and *f) for bilabial obstruents in pTIM, despite the fact that it is not maintained in any of the modern TK languages: Bunaq, Makasae and Makalero have merged reflexes of pTIM *p and *f, whereas in Fataluku and Oirata, *p and *b are merged. We find no evidence to support a three-way split in pTAP; instead, it looks like pTIM underwent a conditioned phoneme split, with distinct reflexes of pTAP *b in initial and non-initial positions, respectively.present the forms for these two correspondence sets respectively. In the first, pAP *p corresponds to pTIM *f in all positions. In the second, pTAP *b was retained as *b in pAP, but split to pTIM *b initially and pTIM *p noninitially. In these sets, there are two notable irregularities: (i) pAP *tiara 'expel' lost the medial bilabial that is retained in pTIM *tifar 'run'; and (ii) pAP *karab 'scratch' and pTIM *gabar 'scratch', which show an irregular correspondence of pAP *b with pTIM *b in medial position.

2.2 Reconstruction of coronal stops

There are two coronal stops, *t and *d, reconstructed to pAP, and four, *t, *d, *T and *D to pTIM.note the uncertainty of pTIM *d, which is supported by three cognate sets only, all of which are in initial position. This is played out also when comparing coronals between AP and TK languages. We can reconstruct the pTAP coronal stops *t with relative certainty, and *d, albeit with less security. The latter segment split in pTIM to *T and *D. At present, we cannot reconstruct pTIM *d to pTAP. There are, however, a substantial number of coronal correspondences which remain unexplained.