2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family Transcription follows IPA conventions.Geminate consonants and long vowels are indicated with a length mark (  ). Word stress is transcribed here only where relevant to the correspondence in question (e.g., 'dog 1 '). In most of the modern languages stress is on the penultimate syllable; however, stress may also be attracted to heavy syllables, as in Teiwa jivar 'dog'. In addition, stress may be phonemically contrastive in some languages, as in Western Pantar ba wa 'conch shell' vs.  bawa 'drum'.

In the tables the languages are arranged in order roughly from west to east with the western-most languages on the left and the eastern-most languages on the right. This arrangement is maintained throughout all the tables in the paper.

In the following subsections we discuss the correspondences in word-initial, word-medial, and word-final position separately for each consonant. By examining the correspondences in each position separately we are able to tease out apparent or false cognates which show the expected form in initial position but an unexpected reflex in medial or final position. Nevertheless, such irregular forms are included in correspondence sets for the sake of completeness. In these cases, the irregular forms are denoted with a preceding double dagger ( ) in the Appendix. For some of these forms, we can identify the form as borrowed from a particular source language, but for many, the reason for the irregularity has not yet been identified. Finally, we reconstruct pAP forms only when we have broad geographic evidence. That is, reflexes must be found in minimally one language of Pantar (Teiwa, Nedebang, Kaera, Western Pantar), one language of West Alor and the Pantar Strait (Blagar, Adang, Klon, Kui), and one language of East Alor (Abui, Kamang, Sawila, Wersing). Where reflexes are found only in a restricted region such as Pantar or Eastern Alor, we do not reconstruct a pAP lexeme.

2.1 Voiced stops

We reconstruct three voiced stops in labial, apical, and velar positions. Labial and apical voiced stops are well attested in initial and medial positions, and only weakly attested in final position. The evidence for a voiced velar stop in initial position is based entirely on third person pronominal forms, and there is no support for a velar stop in final position.

Initial pAP *b is retained everywhere except Abui, where it weakens to /f/, and the Eastern Alor languages Kamang, Sawila, and Wersing, where it is devoiced as /p/. This correspondence is found in 'pig', 'betel nut', 'axe', 'maize', and Gary Holton & Laura C. Robinson

While the correspondence sets for initial *b are extremely regular, they are not without problems, since they may reflect borrowings. The clearest instance of this problem occurs with 'maize', which was first introduced into the region by the Dutch in the 15-16th century. AP lexemes for 'maize' represent indirect borrowings of Old Malay batari 'sorghum' which diffused across the languages as the crop spread. Since the historical record indicates that maize was first introduced into agriculture into western Timor, it is most likely that Austronesian languages of Timor were the proximate source for 'maize' lexemes in AP (e.g., Tetun batar 'maize'). We do not reconstruct a word for 'maize' to pAP, but the cognate set is included here because its consonant correspondences follow the established patterns. That is, the phonological innovations affecting pAP initial *b and final *r must postdate the introduction of the lexical item to Alor-Pantar. Similar issues of borrowing surround the reconstruction of 'betel nut' in pAP. The betel or areca palm (Areca catechu) is known to have been domesticated in mainland Southeast AsiaHowever, there is no archaeological evidence as to when the domesticated palm would have reached the Alor archipelago. There is linguistic and archaeological evidence that Proto-Austronesians in Taiwan had betel (i.e., 'betel' is reconstructable to proto-Austronesian) and that Austronesians transported betel at some points in their dispersal). The similarity of the AP lexemes for 'betel' and those in surrounding Austronesian languages (e.g., Tetun bua 'betel', Tokodede buo 'betel') suggests that AP 'betel' lexemes may in fact be borrowings from Austronesian. Given this lexical likeness and the uncertainty of the timing of the arrival of betel in the region, we tentatively reconstruct a pAP (loan) lexeme for 'betel nut'.

Medial reflexes of *b are found in 'village', 'dog 1 ', 'spear', 'star', 'fish', 'tongue', 'sugarcane', 'shark', 'leg', and 'new'. These follow the same pattern as initial *b except in Teiwa, Nedebang, Western Pantar, and Abui. In Teiwa and Nedebang *b weakens to a fricative; thus, Teiwa haan, Nedebang afa < pAP *haban 'village'. In Western Pantar *b geminates in medial position, thus, Western Pantar haba 'village'. If the final vowel is lost, *b is reflected as /p/ is Western Pantar and is lost in Abui (e.g., Western Pantar hap < pAP *habi 'fish').