The first hypothesis was suggested (and quickly discarded) by, who noted similarities between the Papuan languages of Timor and those of North Halmahera but initially refrained from asserting a genealogical relationship. By that time, the non-Austronesian character of the NH languages had long since been recognized, having been mentioned byand later rigorously demonstrated by, commenting on a field work report from the Pantar language Teiwa (Watuseke 1973), proposed including Teiwa and several Alor languages (Abui, Wersing, Kui) with Cowan's (1957) West Papuan group, which included NH.As later formulated,West Papuan Phylum included the "Alor-Timor" languages. In fact, only one Alor language, Abui, was included in Capell's grouping, as Capell only belatedly became aware of the other extant Alor sources. Even with these additional data, Capell was quite conscious of the tenuous nature of the putative relationship between TAP (actually Alor-Timor) and North Halmahera, particularly the lack of identifiable lexical correspondences. He thus proposed a major split between Alor-Timor (and some Bird's Head languages) on the one hand, and the rest of the West Papuan Phylum on the other. Stokhof suggested connecting TAP with several languages of the Western Bird's Head of New Guinea, concluding that "the Alor-Pantar languages form a closely related group withHowever, the putative West Papuan languages with which Stokhof compared Alor-Pantar were later reclassified as Trans-New Guinea, rendering this lexical evidence moot. More recentlyhas revived the NH hypothesis, based largely on pronominal evidence.

With the exception of this recent work by Donohue, the second hypothesis connecting TAP with TNG has largely supplanted the NH hypothesis in the literature.paper arguing for the NH hypothesis was published with an editorial preface noting that the TAP languages should instead be included within TNGHowever, the accompanying paper on the TNG hypothesis in the same volume provides no data to back up this classification and instead remains skeptical as to whether TAP should be classified as TransNew Guinea or West Papuan. In particular, the authors assert that "whichever way they [the TAP languages] are classified, they contain strong substratum elements of the other  phyla involved"Only recently have additional data been provided to support the TNG hypothesis.cites lexical evidence from TAP languages in support of proto Trans-New Guinea (pTNG) reconstructions.connects TAP to TNG more broadly based on pronominal evidence. Although the evidence for the TNG hypothesis is far from overwhelming, it is today the most widely received classification, appearing for example in the most recent edition of the Ethnologue

One of the challenges to finding support for the TNG hypothesis is the sheer size and diversity which exists within the family. Rather than only considering TNG as a whole, it is also useful to consider smaller families within TNG. Two proposals stand out.suggests connections between TAP and the South Bird's Head family (specifically the Inanwatan language).also made this connection, though he went further to group both TAP and South Bird's Head within his West Papuan Phylum. A second proposal is made by, who considers TAP "possibly part of a western TNG linkage" including West Bomberai, Wissel Lakes, and Dani. As Ross suggests, this more circumscribed linkage is a group of languages descended from a dialect chain and therefore characterized by overlapping innovations. In particular, Ross notes that these languages (including the Timor languages, but excluding the Alor and 150 4 The linguistic position of the Timor-Alor-Pantar languages Pantar languages) all show an innovative metathesis of CV to VC in the first person singular pronoun and that the TAP languages share an innovative first person plural pronoun with the West Bomberai languagesWe are not aware of any serious proposals connecting TAP to Papuan languages outside NH (and the West Papuan Phylum) and TNG.

The possibility that the TAP languages form a family-level isolate not demonstrably related to other Papuan languages was actually suggested by Capell, who concluded:

Neither are the 'Papuan' languages outside New Guinea, in the Solomons, New Britain, Halmahera or Timor related to each other or to those of New Guinea. At least it cannot be assumed that any two are related.However, this null hypothesis has not, to our knowledge, been given serious consideration in the literature. We return to this point in our conclusion ( § 6). In the meantime we evaluate the first two hypotheses in light of the typological evidence ( § 2), pronominal evidence ( § 3), and lexical evidence ( § 4). Evidence for the third hypothesis linking the TAP family with individual languages in Papua is considered in § 5.

2 Typological evidence

Given that typological features can easily cross genealogical boundaries, typological evidence for genealogical relationships should be approached with caution.argue that the region under consideration here-spanning from TAP to NH to New Guinea-is part of the East Nusantara linguistic area which shares a number of typological features in spite of genealogical differences among languages. Moreover, these features are not particularly unique and hence do not provide any special proof of genealogical connection in the sense of