As in Blagar, affines in ascending and descending generations are referred to by a single term-edat. The term-edat is its own reciprocal. Affines in ego's generation are referred to as-amo. A man's brother-in-law may optionally be denoted-eni, the same term which is used to denote marriageable cross-cousins. Spouses of same-sex siblings may refer to each other as siblings, following the relative ages of their spouses. In addition, a more respectful term for the elder of two spouses of same-sex siblings is-ina. Thus, if A and B are brothers, and A is older than B, then B's wife calls A's wife neina, while A's wife calls B's wife ika 'younger sibling'.

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

Gary Holton

Terms which are not gender-specific may be optionally specified for gender using the terms mei 'female' and nen 'male'. For example,-iyol mei 'daughter' and-edat nen 'father-in-law'. Kiraman also has a distinct term-mol by which one wife refers to another in a polygamous marriage. These women refer to each other's children as-amoku.

The Adang kinship system also lacks an obligatory terminological distinction between siblings and (parallel and cross) cousins. There are two primary sets of terminologies for classificatory siblings. The first distinguishes older and younger siblings, matu and di', respectively. The second includes the single term-uding 'sibling'. None of these terms is specified for gender, but each may be optionally modified with ob 'female' or lote 'male' when one wishes to specify gender. Thus, no'uding lote 'my female sibling', i.e., 'my sister'.

The age-based matu/-di' terminology has a connotation of intimacy and is preferred for biological siblings, though-uding can be used in this context as well. The children of one's father's brother and one's mother's sister (i.e., parallel cousins) are generally referred to as-uding, though the matu/-di' terminology is also acceptable here in certain contexts. The children of one's father's sister and one's mother's brother (i.e., cross-cousins) are almost always referred to as-uding; the matu/-di' terminology seems to be unacceptable here. This yields a kind of covert cross-cousin category, as shown in

However, there is wide leeway in the application of this sibling terminology, and the choice between the two sibling terminologies depends greatly on pragmatics.

Co-existing with the two sibling terminologies described above is an additional layer of sibling terminology which does explicitly distinguish cross-cousins. The terms are ob ai 'man's female cross-cousin' (mMBD, mFZD) and lote ai 'woman's 206 5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

x  male cross-cousin' (fMBS, fFZS). These terms are reciprocal, so that if A refers to B as no'ob ai, then B refers to A nolote ai. The terms derive from the gender terms ob 'female' and lote 'male' plus ai 'child', but when possessed the gender terms are identical to the terms for spouses, thus these cross-cousin terms translate literally as 'husband child' and 'wife child'. Though not used as terms of address, the ob ai/lote ai relationship is very salient to speakers, even though the referents may continue to refer to each other using the regular sibling terminology. These terms refer strictly to opposite-sex cross-cousins; Adang has no special terminology for same-sex cross-cousins. A fourth optional distinction in ego's generation is made using the term asel, derived from sel, a term sometimes translated as 'tree' (Malay 'pohon') but which actually refers to 'area underneath, base', as in ti sel 'area beneath the tree' (see ยง 3). The term asel denotes one's mother's brother and descendants. Thus, maternal cross-cousins of either gender are asel. Like ob ai/lote ai, the term asel is not used as a term of address but rather as a description, delineating those descendants of my mother's (brother's) family. The entire mother's brother's lineage can be referred to as asel em, derived from em 'old'.

The term sel also occurs in ascending terminology-imang sel 'uncle' (MB, FB) and-ife sel 'aunt' (MZ, FZ). My consultants struggled with the latter term, maintaining that sel has no role in nife sel and that the modifier could equally be omitted. In contrast,-imang sel is clearly distinguished from-imang 'father'. It appears that the use of the modifier sel has been extended by analogy.