In an alternative analysis, proto-Straits-West-Alor *utitoga 'seven' would be a compound of proto-Alor-Pantar *buta 'four' and *(a)tiga 'three'The advantage of this etymology is that no borrowing from Austronesian is invoked. However, the analysis implies that proto-Straits-West-Alor innovated a numeral 293 Antoinette Schapper & Marian Klamer with a quaternary base as the initial member of an additive compound. This would effectively add a completely new (fourth) type to the structural inventory of numeral system types found in AP numerals.

Recall that AP numerals have (i) additive compounds with quinary bases as first element (e.g. 52), (ii) multiplicative compounds with quaternary bases as second (not first) element [e.g. 24], and (iii) subtractive compounds ([10]2). While we cannot exclude the possibility that a (proto-)language invents a completely new structural type for a single numeral, we believe this scenario to be less likely than the borrowing plus reanalysis scenario outlined above.

It should be added that there is no evidence that a new] pattern could have been borrowed from neighbouring Austronesian language(s), as] 'seven' is not attested anywhere in the regionNumerals with a quaternary base are found in the region, but these are all multiplicative forms: [2 4] (Flores) or [4 2] (Lembata) 'eight' (seeand Appendix A.2).

5.2.3 Other mixed systems for 'seven' to 'nine'

In the previous section it was mentioned that 'seven' through 'nine' in Kui and Western Pantar include formative elements of the Straits West Alor system. However, the formatives are part of different systems, using a range of bases.we set out the formatives found in Kui 'seven' to 'nine'. We can see that Kui has replaced the proto-Straits-West-Alor subtractive numerals for 'seven' and 'nine' with additive base-five numeralsThe numeral tadusa 'eight' follows a different pattern, apparently being built from two morphemes: (i) the first element tad-appears to reflect the subtractive morpheme *tur-(< pre-pSWA *tukari) used in forming pSWA *turarok 'eight' (see), and (ii) the second element usa is the Kui numeral 'four' (< pAP *buta 'four').we set out the formatives found in Western Pantar 'seven' to 'nine'. We can see that proto-Straits-West-Alor subtractive numeral *tukarinuk 'nine' have been replaced by an innovative, but still subtractive form composed of the numeral 'one' denoting the subtrahend and the lexical verb 'take away' signalling the subtraction. The numerals 'seven' and 'eight' follow a different, innovative pattern in which be- bet-, reflecting *uti-as also used in the formation of protoStraits-West-Alor *utitoga 'seven', is combined with 'two' and 'three' to form 'eight' and 'nine' respectively.

anukutanna < anuku 'one' tanna 'take away'

Synchronic evidence for their poly-morphemic status includes the distributive formation of 'seven', which takes the right-most element as the base for the reduplication: betalakutalaku 'sevenredup' 'seven by seven', betigatiga 'eightredup' 'eight by eight', and anuktannatanna 'nineredup' 'nine by nine'. The segmentation in distributives appears to be a historical relic. This is suggested by the irregularities in the distributive derivation of 'seven': there has been a reanalysis of the morpheme boundary between bet-and alaku 'two' to become be-talaku, analogous to the segmentation of the numeral betiga 'three'. The reanalysis points to speakers not being able to decompose the complex numerals into their orginal forms.

Thus, in Western Pantar, *uti-has been adopted not as a minuend (as in protoStraits-West-Alor 'seven'), but as an augend. We posit that proto-Western Pantar originally had an additive base-5 system in which 'seven' and 'eight' were formedthree' respectively, as set out in stage I inIn stage II, pre-Western Pantar 'five' is replaced by a reflex of proto-Austronesian *pitu 'seven' borrowed either directly from an Austronesian language under the same forces for pre-proto-Straits-West-Alor as described in ยง 5.2.2, or perhaps more likely from a (proto)-Straits-West-Alor language. In stage III, the pattern of using *uti-as an augend for the formation of 'seven' in stage II is extended to the formation of 'eight' (

In sum, in Kui, the proto-Straits-West-Alor subtractive numerals for 'seven' and 'nine' have been replaced by additive base-five forms