Kamang ela 'base'-paa ela MB,-auko ela MZ Wersinglanguages except Adang. Most of the gender-based systems distinguish between same-sex and opposite-sex siblings. Teiwa is unique in having gender-based sibling terms which are absolute and not dependent on relative genders of ego and alter. None of the sibling terms can be reconstructed at the level of proto-AlorPantar with much confidence. Only 'younger sibling' and 'opposite-sex sibling' have a very wide distribution across the languages, as shown inBut even these forms do not obey established consonant correspondences, so they are likely to have diffused. The choice between age-based and gender-based systems is for the most part pragmatically governed, with the latter being more formal or distant. In some languages there is a strong preference for use of the age-based terms for same-sex siblings and the gender-based terms for opposite-sex siblings. In Western Pantar this preference is strictly manifested so that age-based terms are used only for same-sex siblings, while distinct terms are used for opposite-sex siblings. In addition, Western Pantar has distinct terms for male speaking and female speaking for 'elder (same-sex) sibling' and 'opposite-sex sibling'.

All of the languages have terminology for distinguishing cross-cousins. However, the languages vary as to whether: (i) cross-cousins are obligatorily distinguished; (ii) when cross-cousins are distinguished, marriageable (opposite-sex) are obligatorily distinguished from non-marriageable (same-sex) cross-cousins;5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages (iii) when cross-cousins are distinguished, those on MB side are distinguished from those on FZ side; and (iv) there are cross-cousin terms distinct from terms referring to the entire lineage. These distinctions are summarized in

The languages fall into two groups along the first parameter above. Only the three Pantar languages Western Pantar, Teiwa, and Blagar obligatorily distinguish cross-cousins from siblings. In these languages cross-cousins form a distinct category and are not considered siblings. In the other languages crosscousins can be distinguished when necessary, but they can also be referred to using the sibling terminology. Only Western Pantar obligatorily distinguishes 223 Gary Holton same-sex from opposite-sex cross-cousins. In Teiwa and Blagar a single term applies to cross-cousins regardless of gender, while those of opposite gender may be optionally distinguished. As can be seen from Table 16, it is not possible to reconstruct any of the cross-cousin terminology for these languages. The Teiwa term-ian may be related to the term-ianqai 'brother'. No inferences can be drawn regarding the historical origin of the cross-cousin terms in Western Pantar and Blagar.

Only in Western Pantar can the opposite-sex cross-cousin term be used as a form of address. In Teiwa and Blagar this term is avoided in address by using the general form. In Wersing the opposite-sex cross-cousin term has a strong association with marriage and is thus avoided in address by using the sibling terminology instead.

The remaining five languages, all spoken on Alor, classify siblings and (parallel and cross) cousins together. However, these languages may optionally distinguish cross-cousins, and in doing so also distinguish between maternal and paternal cross-cousins. In Kiraman, Abui, Kamang, and Wersing maternal crosscousins are referred to with a term derived from the word for 'male', while paternal cross-cousins are referred to with a term derived from the word for 'female'. In Adang only maternal cross-cousins are distinguished; there is no separate term for paternal cross-cousins. Terms for maternal and paternal cross-cousins are compared inKiraman also has a term-ueni which refers specifically to a man's maternal opposite-sex cross-cousin (mMBD) and reciprocally to a woman's paternal opposite-sex cross-cousin (fFZS). This term then extends to a man's paternal same-sex cross-cousin (mFZS), since this person is a potential spouse of one's-eni and is thus also referred to as-eni.

Here again the terms for maternal and paternal cross-cousins do not admit a reconstruction. Though Kiraman, Adang, Kamang, and Wersing derive the crosscousin terms from the words for 'male' and 'female', they do so by the addition of different (and non-cognate) formatives.

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

Affine terminology also exhibits significant variation across the languages. Where distinct terminology for cross-cousins and mother's brother exists, this same terminology is applied to affines. In ego's generation this follows logically from the observation that the spouse of ego's sibling should ideally be that sibling's cross-cousin, hence also cross-cousin to ego. Similar reasoning suggests that the parent of ego's spouse should be called by the same term as ego's mother's brother or father's sister, since those persons would be the parent of ego's cross-cousin, who would be ego's ideal marriage partner. However, only Western Pantar and Teiwa actually adopt this strategy for spouse's parent and affines of ego's generation. The terminology for affines is summarized in