is in fact the first publication actually demonstrating the relatedness using the Comparative Method. Another popular assumption is that the Timor-AlorPantar family is part of the Trans-New Guinea family. However, detailed investigations by Holton and Robinson in this volume indicate that there is insufficient evidence to confirm a genealogical relationship between TAP and any other family, that is, TAP must be considered a family-level isolate. The question where the Papuan languages of Timor, Alor and Pantar originate from thus yet remains unanswered, and there is yet no integrated account of the history of the AlorPantar region. We need detailed studies of how the languages have been in contact with each other, and to reveal more of the culture history of the speakers, more fine-grained bottom up research of targeted parts of the region is necessary, in particular combining linguistic research with results from ethnographic, archaeological, and musicological research.

Some of the typological features of Alor-Pantar languages are cross-linguistically quite rare: their strong preference to index P but not A on transitive verbs; the extreme variety in morphological alignment patterns; the use of plural number words; the existence of quinary numeral systems; the elaborate spatial deictic systems involving an elevation component; and the great variation exhibited in their kinship systems. There are bound to be more such features to be unravelled in future studies.

All the languages discussed in this volume are extremely fragile, and to keep them alive for future generations of speakers, parents must continue to speak their language with their children. We hope that this volume will create an awareness among local speakers as well as government officials and Indonesian linguists about the unique characteristics and richness of this small nonAustronesian family.

1 The Alor-Pantar languages: Linguistic context, history and typology through survey word lists and a set of specially prepared video clips, as well as questionnaires on specific topics. The questionnaire used for the collection of numeral words and arithmetic expressions is included in the Appendix ofThe set of video clips that was designed to elicit expressions of one and two-participant events in AP languages is described inThe description of the elicitation task itself is included in the Appendix of their chapter, and the set of clips is downloadable from www. smg.surrey.ac.uk/projects/alor-pantar/pronominal-marking-video-stimuli/.

All authors contributing to this volume have endeavoured to make the empirical basis on which their investigations rest as explicit as possible. To this end, most of the chapters include a section referred to as 'Sources', which lists the various sources (both published and unpublished) that were used for the chapter, their authors/collectors and the year(s) of collection. Roughly four types of data sets have been used: word lists, corpora, field notes and responses to video clips.

The word lists used for the chapters on the history of AP languages are part of a lexical database referred to as the Alor-Pantar (AP) Lexical Database, an Excel sheet with over 400 words, containing lexical survey data from Nedebang, Western Pantarlexical database were used inWhere a more extensive lexicon of a language is available, that lexicon was used instead of the lexical survey lists. Thus, the lexical data from Teiwa, Kaera, Western Pantar, Blagar, Adang, Klon, Abui, and Sawila are from Toolbox files mutually shared among the researchers, and a published dictionary was the source for Kamang

The chapters on the typology of AP languages use corpora as data sets, and build on information collected by researchers in the field ("fieldnotes"). A corpus of an AP language as it is used in this volume typically consists of a Toolbox file containing various spoken texts, which have been transcribed, glossed and translated by the researcher working on the language. Corpus data are cited in the text with reference to the author and the language, and refer to the sources given in the next section.

Abbreviations

1 Introduction

In this chapter we review the reconstruction of proto-Alor-Pantar (pAP) based on the comparative method. We then examine the internal relationships of the Alor-Pantar family and discuss several approaches to subgrouping. In the literature, the Alor-Pantar languages are usually considered to belong to the larger Timor-Alor-Pantar (TAP) group, which includes the Papuan languages of neighboring Timor and Kisar. The Alor-Pantar languages form a well-defined subgroup within TAP and share a common history independent of the Timor languages. The relationship between Alor-Pantar and the Timor languages is discussed in the following chapter; the wider historical relationships with languages beyond Timor-Alor-Pantar are discussed in Chapter 4.

The AP languages form one of only two large pockets of non-Austronesian languages in East Nusantara outside New Guinea (the other being North Halmahera, to which AP languages are not related-see Chapter 4). In contrast to neighboring Timor, all but one of the two dozen or so indigenous languages of the Alor-Pantar archipelago are non-Austronesian.