The expression of elevation is considered in seven AP languages from across the archipelago. I discuss languages in order of the complexity of their elevational systems. Complexity here is calculated by looking at both the number of elevation-marked terms and the number of semantic components within the different elevational domains. The relative complexity of the different AP systems is discussed at the end of this section ( § 3.8).

3.1 Wersing

Wersing has one of the simpler elevational systems, with a total of nine elevationmarked terms. There are three elevationals for the three elevational heights, each matched with motion verbs denoting movement to and from the deictic centreNo additional semantic distinctions are made in the elevational or verbal paradigm.Wersing elevationals can be used as one-place predicates encoding the location of a NP referent at an elevation relative to the speaker. Example (2) illustrates this predicative use.

3 This section is based on

Antoinette Schapper

The elevationals also have non-predicative uses where they locate an action or an entity as at a particular elevation. In these contexts the elevational follows the clausal element(s) over which it has scope. In (3) the elevational mona follows the NP headed by pei 'pig' and denotes the elevation of the pig at the time of its still breathing. In (4) yona follows the verbal predicate aki 'call' and denotes the elevation at which the calling takes place.

(3) NP scope Wersing

Teiwa also has a simple 9-term elevational systemLike Wersing, elevationals and elevation-marked motion verbs distinguish the three elevational heights and no additional semantic distinctions are made. Teiwa elevationals occur predicatively, where they indicate the elevational height of the NP referent, as in (5).

Elevationals in Teiwa can also occur in positions both before and after predicates. In (6) maraqai precedes the postpositional predicate uyan me, and locates it as at a higher elevation than the speaker. In (7) yaqai after the verb yix denotes the location resulting from the motion as at a lower elevation than the speaker.

In Abui elevational motion verbs maintain the simple three-way distinction already observed in Wersing and Teiwa. However, the elevationals show an extra degree of elaboration in the high and low spheres, with a distance contrast being added between near and far locations. The level sphere does not show this extra semantic component. Abui elevationals can be predicates, as for instance inwhere oro denotes elevation of the branch in relation to the speaker. Where they indicate the eleThe syntactic classification of the elevationals is that of the present author.includes elevationals in a single class with the demonstratives do, o, to, yo, and the articles hu and nu. These two sets have different syntactic distributions from the set of elevationals I identify. See Schapper & San Roque (2011) for details on the morphosyntactic properties of Abui demonstratives. The distributional characteristics of Abui elevations are set out in the main text here.

Antoinette Schappervation at which an action takes place, elevations occur directly before a verb, as with the predicative verb burok 'move' in (9).

Abui elevationals can also occur in NPs. In an NP headed by a noun the elevational follows the head, but to the left of any article or demonstrative marking the right periphery of the NP. For instance, in (10) the level elevational oro follows the NP head fu 'betel' but precedes the demonstrative do. It indicates the elevation at which the betel palm is found. An elevational can also occur in an NP without a head noun. In this case the elevational is the head of the NP and the referent of the NP is the location indicated by the elevational. In (11) the low elevationalò heads the NP marked by the article nu and the demonstrative do. This NP occurs in the postpositional phrase headed by = and denotes the goal location for the motion dignified by the elevational verb pa 'go down'.

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages

Blagar has a plethora of elevation terms, with a total of 32 elevation-marked forms. These occur in paradigms with speech participant-anchored terms (Table 5). Blagar has five locationals. These appear both as independent words and as constituents of multiple sets of derived items (bolded in). These particles consist of the three elevationals, mo 'level', do 'high' and po 'low', plus two unelevated speech participant-anchored locationals,  a 'prox.spkr' and  u 'prox.addr'. Only the elevational motion verbs, which have different etymologies, do not include the basic elevationals in their forms.

The elevationals occur in two positions: between the subject and its predicate, as in, and following the predicate, as inThe different positions are associated with different epistemic values. The clause-medial position connotes epistemic certainty on the part of the speaker, while the clause-final position connotes epistemic accessibility to the addressee, that is, that the addressee is or could be aware of the situation described in the clause (Hein Steinhauer, p.c.). 4