Very rarely marriage may occur between more distantly related siblings, that is, between a man and his-aipang wang gamining or between a woman and her-aiyang wang gamining. This could happen for instance with an affine relative of one's sibling when that sibling marries into another clan. The participants in such a marriage may refer to each other as wallang (i.e.,-baddang), since that is considered the ideal marriage relationship. However, this relationship is referred to as burang nattang, literally 'getting together shaking hands'. At one time such a practice resulted in much stronger reprobation. In contrast, marriage between a man and his-aipang haila or between a woman and her-aiyang haila is never permitted, even today.

As in Western Pantar, in Blagar all marriages are effectively treated as if they were cross-cousin marriages. As noted in ยง 2.3, if marriage between ego and his or her cross-cousin is actually realized, then ego's-imang era and-iva era become simply-idat 'in-laws'. Similarly, these new parents-in-law now also refer to ego as-idat rather than-bhilang. The spouse of ego continues to be referred to by these parents-in-law as a classificatory child-oqai, since ego's cross-cousin is the child of ego's-imang era and-iva era (now-idat). Significantly, this remains the case even when-bhilang does not marry their cross-cousin. That is, whomever ego's-bhilang marries becomes ego's classificatory child, regardless of whether they held this status prior to the marriage. This relationship may then be propagated recursively. The result is that ego's spouse is always treated as the child of ego's potential parents-in-law (MB or FZ), hence ego's cross-cousin.

4.2 Asymmetrical exchange

Kiraman practices matrilineal cross-cousin marriage, in which the ideal marriage relationship is between a man and his matrilineal cross-cousin, i.e., his mother's brother's daughter, whom he denotes with the term-eni. This system is asymmetrical in that marriage between a man and his patrilineal cross-cousin is prohibited. While such potential marriage relationships are not always realized, a man is said to have the right of marriage with his-eni. That is, such a marriage cannot be opposed by either the man's or women's family. In contrast, marriage between a man and his paternal cross-cousin (mFZD) is prohibited. Thus, marriage exchanges, at least in the ideal, are skewed toward the man's mother's brother's side.

If one actually does marry one's-eni then this person is referred to as-eni tosei (< tosei 'born together'). Moreover, if one does marry one's-eni then the siblings of this spouse can also be referred to as-eni. This explains why-eni can sometimes be extended to denote a man's same-sex paternal cross-cousin (mFZS) or a woman's same-sex maternal cross-cousin (fMBD), since those persons are the siblings of one's ideal marriage partner. If one does not marry one's-eni then that person can be distinguished as-eni yira (< yira 'base', see ยง 3). Marriageable cross-cousins who do not actually marry each other can also be referred to as yiramei 'man's marriageable cross-cousin' and yiranen 'woman's marriageable cross-cousin', though these terms are used only referentially and not as termsGary Holton of address. The reciprocal terms yiramei and yiranen refer only to relationships established through a man's maternal uncle's side, and reciprocally a woman's paternal aunt's side. There are no special terms for the man's paternal uncle's side or woman's maternal aunt's side, further reflecting the asymmetry.

4.3 Non-prescriptive systems

In the remaining languages Adang, Abui, and Kamang there is no explicit marriage prescription. Marriage with close relatives is proscribed, and in Kamang this includes also a proscription against cross-cousin marriage. In Adang marriage between cross-cousins (i.e., ob ai and lote ai) is permitted but not required or even venerated, though in the modern contexts some regard the practice as backward and are reluctant to speak openly about it. Although the cross-cousin relationship is not considered to be a potential marriage relationship in the sense of being preferential, the relationship does have additional consequences within the kinship system. For example, if two men who can both call a given woman ob ai, then they must call each other as brothers. The designation asel referring to the mother's brother's lineage does not specify a prescribed marriage relationship, but the position of asel carries certain rights and privileges. For example, asel receives additional payments during bride wealth negotiations.