Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

Gary Holton

Although virtually all of the societies of eastern Indonesia practise some form of marital alliance between descent groups, there is an exuberant and sometimes perplexing variation in the form that such alliance systems take.This chapter compares kinship terminologies and kinship practices in eight AlorPantar languages forming a broad geographic and typological sample of the family.

In spite of the close genealogical relationship between the languages, there is surprisingly little evidence of shared (cognate) kinship vocabulary, and the kinship systems exhibit great variation. The westernmost languages distinguish both maternal and paternal cross-cousins (children of opposite-sex siblings) as ideal marriage partners, while at the opposite extreme in the highlands of Alor are found languages which expressly forbid cross-cousin marriage. Even among languages whose kinship systems are roughly similar, the terms themselves are often not cognate. Likewise, cognate terms often have varying semantics across the languages. The current distribution of kinship terminologies suggests a recent drift toward symmetric exchange systems which distinguish both maternal and paternal crosscousins, perhaps under the influence of neighboring Austronesian languages.

1 Introduction

One approaches the study of kinship in Eastern Indonesia with some trepidation, for it has a chequered past. For a time Eastern Indonesia and especially East Nusantara was a nexus of kinship studies (see

was losing its favored place in anthropological theory, as authors such asargued that the notion of kinship itself should be considered a cultural construct, not necessarily universal. While these academic trends had notably less effect on the Dutch school prevalent in Indonesian kinship studies, there has nonetheless been relatively little work on kinship in the region over the past two decades, and almost none in Alor-Pantar. More recently, a renewed interest in symbolic meaning has brought anthropological and linguistic approaches more closely in line (seeWithout revisiting the anthropological debates that have shaped the study of kinship, this chapter takes a more traditional approach to kinship, focusing first and foremost on kinship terminology. Kinship as practice may well be a cultural construct, but it is necessarily grounded in a web of linguistic terminological structure. This chapter can be read as a first step toward understanding that terminology in the Alor-Pantar languages within a comparative context. The kinship systems in Alor-Pantar languages exhibit great variation. The westernmost languages, Blagar, Teiwa, and Western Pantar, classify siblings and parallel cousins together in distinction to cross-cousins. That is, children of samesex siblings (parallel cousins) are classified using the same terminology as used for siblings, while children of opposite-sex siblings (cross-cousins) are classified using distinct terminology. Marriage between cross-cousins is or was until recently considered the ideal. At the opposite extreme, in the highlands of Alor, Kamang expressly forbids cross-cousin marriage. Other languages show traces of asymmetrical exchange, reflected either in their kinship terminologies, in their marriage practices, or both. These languages distinguish the relationship between a man and his female maternal cross-cousin, his mother's brother's daughter, but do not highlight the relationship between a man and his paternal female cross-cousin. Even among languages whose kinship systems are roughly similar, the terms themselves are often not cognate. Likewise, cognate terms often have varying semantics across the languages. The general picture which emerges is one of drift toward symmetric exchange. Several independent sub-patterns can be identified. These will be discussed following a description of the systems in each of the individual languages.

An important aspect of all the kinship systems considered here is the identification of cross-cousins. Children of same-sex siblings are classed as siblings, whereas children of opposite-sex siblings are cross-cousins and in some languages are considered ideal marriage partners. While this basic distinction is preserved to a greater or lesser degree across the languages, there is significant variation in kinship terminologies. Comparing these systems provides insight 192 5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages into the history and dispersal of the Alor-Pantar languages, as well as possible language contact scenarios.

In this chapter I compare kinship terminology in eight Alor-Pantar languages forming a broad geographic and typological sample of the family (see the Sources section at the end of this chapter for details). For all of the languages, data were obtained by eliciting genealogies for several individuals and then discussing those genealogies with both the same and other individuals in order to verify and fill in any gaps in the systems. For Western Pantar I relied also on my own fieldnotes from several years of work with the language, and for Blagar I also drew on the description inFor those two languages the kinship terminology can be considered complete. For the remaining languages it is possible that some terms have been overlooked. Hence, the absence here of, say, a Teiwa term by which the wives of two brothers address each other should not be taken as evidence that such a term does not exist in Teiwa. It is possible that such a term does exist but has not yet been recorded.

The following section describes the kinship terminology in each of the eight languages individually. Then in ยง 3 these terminologies are compared across the languages. ยง 4 presents a brief description of marriage prescriptions. Finally, ยง 5 concludes with a discussion of the likely history of kinship systems in the Alor-Pantar languages.