notes in his discussion of the pre-linguistic basis for semantics, animacy is a more permanent property and is 'less perception dependent'.

Of the three languages in our sample Abui shows the greatest flexibility of combining verbs with prefixes from different series. However, the pat prefix series is much more lexically limited than the other inflections in Abui. Verbs that take this prefix are the only verbs showing lexical classing, i.e., the absence of alternation.

5.1.1 Inflection classes in Abui

The discussion here is based on a detailed examination of the prefixal behaviour of 210 verbs. The numbers reflect the state of the documentation and analysis of the language at present (see Kratochvíl, Abui corpus).

For 33 Abui verbs inflection with a pat prefix is either obligatory or optional.presents the distribution of the pat prefix across the whole sample (all percentages rounded to whole numbers). Obligatory inflection with a pat prefix means that a verb has to have a prefix and that the prefix has to be from the pat prefix series. In other words, these verbs exclusively appear with the pat prefix. This is the case for 14% of the verbs in the sample (29 out of 210 verbs). Within

Sebastian Fedden & Dunstan Brown optional pat verbs we distinguish two cases. First, there are the verbs that always require a prefix, and this may be from any series, including the pat series. These are a minority (4 out of 210 verbs, or 2% in). Second, there are the verbs that may occur without a prefix or with a prefix, from any series, including the pat series. These form a substantial subset (68 out of 210 verb or 32% in

injure.compl-pfv 'When the younger one followed him, people killed (him). ' 1985: 56) and that instigation is sometimes used interchangeably with controlOn volition as an entailment which identifies (Proto-)Agents, see

As we noted, volitionality may be a property associated with nouns denoting human (or some animate) participants, but many nouns of this type are noncommittal as to the volition of what they denote. This contrasts with animacy, where a noun either denotes an animate or an inanimate entity. For verbs there is also no requirement that their lexical semantics be committed to a value for volitionality, but this information can be encoded by the choice of indexing they take. Animacy, on the other hand, is a lexical property. Hence, where volitionality is involved, this is a semantic factor associated with the event as a whole.

In Abui, a language with semantic alignment, volitionality is an important factor. It determines whether an S is indexed. The absence of a prefix signals volitional S's, whereas free pronouns are outside the system of volitionality and non-volitionality. This is illustrated with the following pair: na laak [1sg leave] 'I go away' vs. (na) no-laak [(1sg) 1sg.rec-leave] 'I (am forced to) retreat'. These examples illustrate this with the first person, which has the potential to differ in terms of volitionality. We can therefore identify a relative scale with respect to the factors, where affectedness is about the event and volitionality can be about the event, but where the lexical semantics of certain items restricts the possibilities for its application.

In the video elicitation task Abui had the most instances of prefixation of the S in one-place predicates

A proportion of 45% is very high in comparison to Teiwa, where S's were not indexed at all in the video elicitation tasks, and to Kamang, where an average of 19% of S's were indexed.

As we shall see, non-volitionality, when combined with animacy, appears to play a bigger role in prefixation in Abui intransitives than in any of the other languages. This is consistent with Kratochvíl's analysis of Abui as a semanti

Sebastian Fedden & Dunstan Brown cally aligned language. Free pronouns on their own, that is without a co-referent prefix, are reserved for typical agents, i.e., participants who have volition with respect to the event and are not affected by it. The set of free pronouns includes the third person pronoun di, 12 which can appear on its own or be adnominal following a noun phrase. In our experiment, there were no instances where an S was encoded with di in any of the responses. In all cases noun phrases without di were used, for example in

Other examples from the experiment are: mit 'sit', natet 'stand' and it 'lie'. Further examples from the Abui corpus are: ayong 'swim', kalol 'foretell (fortune or the future)'go'. Semantically, these are mainly motion verbs, posture verbs, and social activities. Typically these express their S with a free pronoun and not a prefix because they typically denote events with volitional participants.

Free pronouns can be combined with a co-referent prefix (in the third person this needs to be an -type prefix) to express reflexive situations, in which the agent is volitional but also affected by his (own) action. As there are no examples of this construction in the responses to the video elicitation task, a textual example is given in