In the languages of Pantar and the Straits, possessive constructions like those in (2) are the base for ordinal constructions such as those in, where the elements maing, ma or mi occur between the possessor prefix and the numeral.

In Western Pantar, the ordinal element is a free form maing; in Teiwa, Kaera, Blagar, and Adang it is a bound morpheme (ma-or mi-). The ordinal elements are formally similar to existing words in the respective languages: Western Pantar mayang 'to place', Teiwa ma 'come, obl', and Kaera/Blagar/Adang mi 'obl' (<pAP *mai 'come' and *mi 'be in/onSynchronically, the semantic and syntactic link between these free forms and the ordinal markers is obscure. It may be that the ordinal morphemes express notions that are (historically) related to notions of placement or location at a particular numeral rank. However, their position preceding the numeral does not parallel the position of verbs and oblique markers, which in AP languages always follow their nominal complement. Note however, that the ordinals in Adang involve two identical morphemes: one preceding and one following the numeral. This might reflect an earlier structure where the ordinal marker followed the numeral, paralleling the position of case markers and verbs.

The second areal pattern of ordinal constructions is found in Central-East Alor, where ordinal constructions are also possessive constructions but now without an ordinal element included. Compare the constructions in

In East Alor, ordinal structures that diverge from both these areal patterns are found in) and Sawila ordinals employ applicative verbs involving the cognate prefixes we-/wii-, illustrated in (6) andIn Kula ordinals this verb combines with a possessive structure, (7). In Sawila, possessive constructions are not used in ordinals, (9).

In all AP languages, the ordinals for 'second' and higher are regularly derived. There is no limit in the creation of ordinals on the basis of higher, morphologically more complex, cardinals.Some variation exists, however, in the expression of 'first'. Adang and Kamang form 'first' by the regular process used for 'second' and above. Teiwa and Abui use forms for 'first' that are unrelated to the numeral 'one', compare (10) (a-b) and (11) (a-b). In Teiwa, the regular derivation from nuk does not exist, (10)(b); in Abui, it does exist, but has a different meaning ('the only/single/particular'), (11)(b). Western Pantar has two options to express 'first'. One is to use the regular construction derived from (a)nuku 'one', as in(a) while the other option is to use a different root ye (12)(b) with an unclear etymology. There is a functional difference between Western Pantar ordinal based on anuku which is often used in predicative contexts ('you are the first'), and ye, which is preferred in attributive contexts ('my first child').

In sum, the AP languages regularly derive ordinals from numerals with a possessor morpheme, so that syntactically the ordinal construction is a possessed nominal phrase. Apart from the third person possessor morpheme, which is used 336 8 Numeral words and arithmetic operations in the Alor-Pantar languages across the board, ordinals vary in structure when we go from west to east. In the western languages (Pantar-Straits-West Alor) special morphemes are employed which may be etymologically related to free forms encoding locations, though synchronically, this relation is not transparent. In the eastern languages, ordinals involve an applicative morpheme. At least three of the AP languages have an ordinal 'first' involving a root that is different from the cardinal 'one'. This is in line with the cross-linguistic tendency for languages with ordinals unrelated to cardinals to confine them to the lowest numerals

2.3 Distributive numerals 2.3.1 Forms and distribution of distributives

Distributive numerals function to express notions such as 'one by one' or 'in groups of three'. AP languages create distributive numerals by reduplication of the cardinal numeral, or a part of it. Cross-linguistically, reduplication is the most common strategy to form distributives: in about 33% of the 251 languages in Gil's (2013) sample, distributives are created in this way. As Gil points out, the reduplicative strategy is iconically motivated: repeated copies of the cardinal correspond to multiple sets of objects.

Distributive numerals follow the noun or pronoun they modify, as illustrated inDistributives can modify different clausal arguments; for example, an actor subject in (13) and (14) or a patient object in (15).

By contrast, Kamang reduplicates the initial element wesing. As main stress is on the final syllable of the numerals in Kamang just as it is in Abui, we analyse this as a choice of reduplicative base in Kamang distributives which diverges from the overall pattern of AP languages.