Typologically, the AP systems are remarkable for their complexity, which is much greater than that found in Papuan languages elsewhere for which deictic systems with elevational components have been described (see, e.g.,Other Papuan languages only ever have three terms for the three elevational heights and do not reiterate the elevational distinctions across multiple parts of the lexicon. We might conjecture that the semantic elaborations of elevational domains with features such as distance, steepness and directionality that we have observed in AP languages are rare cross-linguistically, and parallels remain to be identified in a world-wide survey of elevational systems.

The persistent occurrence of elevational distinctions across word classes in AP languages can be usefully understood in terms of the preexisting concept of "semplates"A semplate is defined as "a configuration consisting of distinct sets or layers of lexemes, drawn from different semantic subdomains or different word classes, mapped onto the same abstract semantic template"This fits well with the basic AP pattern in which locationals and motion verbs are organized by a semantic template differentiating the three elevational domains. The interesting feature of AP elevational semplates is their overtness in many instances: Adang, Blagar, Western Pantar use the same morphemes to reiterate the elevational semplate across word classes, while, as we saw in § 4.2, Kamang has in part discarded inherited lexemes and developed a system of morphemic atoms used to form complex subnodes in the elevational semplate. Thus, the AP elevational systems studied here not only present new evidence for the existence oftemplates, but also have the potential to illuminate the diachronic processes by which abstract semplates may become productive and increasingly overt in their marking.

Kratochvíl Abui corpus, Kratochvíl (2007) Adang

Acknowledgments

Thanks go to Hein Steinhauer, Gary Holton and Frantiek Kratochvíl for answering my many questions on the elevation terms in the languages of their expertise. I would also like to thank Juliette Huber for the very useful discussions on elevation terms in Makasae and Makalero, related languages spoken on Timor. Information on these languages does not appear in this chapter, but comparison with them informed some of the reconstructions made here. Any errors are, of course, my own.

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages

1 Introduction

Numerals and numeral systems have long been of typological and historical interest to linguists. Papuan languages are best known in the typological literature on numerals for having body-part tally systems and, to a lesser extent, restricted numeral systems which have no cyclically recurring base). Papuan languages are also typologically interesting for the fact that they often make use of bases of other than the cross-linguistically most

frequent decimal and vigesimal bases, such as quinary (Lean 1992) and senary basesIn this chapter we present an in-depth analysis of numeral forms and systems in the Alor-Pantar (AP) languages. Typologically, the family reflects a rare combination of mono-morphemic 'six' with quinary forms for numerals 'seven' to 'nine', a pattern which we reconstruct back to proto-AP. We focus on the structure of cardinal numerals, highlighting the diversity of the numeral systems involved. We reconstruct numeral forms to different levels of the AP family, and argue that AP numeral systems have been complicated at different stages by reorganizations of patterns of numeral formation and by borrowings. This has led to patchwork numeral systems in the modern languages, incorporating to different extents: (i) quaternary, quinary and decimal bases; (ii) additive, subtractive and multiplicative procedures, and; (iii) non-numeral lexemes such as 'single' and 'take away'. We complement the genealogical perspective with an areal one, comparing the numeral systems of the AP languages with those of the Austronesian languages in their immediate vicinity to study if and how contact has affected the numeral paradigms.

This chapter centres on numeral data from 19 Alor-Pantar language varieties spanning east to west across the AP archipelago, presented collectively in Appendix A.1. As a motivated phonemic orthography is yet lacking for many of the varieties in our sample, all the data is presented in a broad IPA transcription. The fieldworkers who collected the data are recognized in the 'Sources' section at the end of the chapter.

We begin with an overview of the terminology used throughout this chapter in § 2 and a brief note on sound changes in numeral compounds in § 3. We then describe how cardinal numerals are constructed across the AP languages: 'one' to 'five' are discussed in § 4, 'six' to 'nine' in § 5, and numerals 'ten' and above in § 6. § 7 looks at the AP numeral systems in typological and areal perspective, while § 8 summarizes our findings.

2 Terminological preliminaries

Numerals are 'spoken normed expressions that are used to denote the exact number of objects for an open class of objects in an open class of social situations with the whole speech community in question'A numeral system is thus the arrangement of individual numeral expressions together in a language.