In the Appendix we list only the original reflex, not the secondary development reflected in 'betel vine'. However, we note that betel vine may be introduced; see also the case of 'betel nut' in section 2.1 above.

Initially and medially, *k remains unchanged in all languages except Adang, where it is reflected as a glottal stop, and Western Pantar, where it is predictably geminated in medial position. Correspondence sets supporting initial *k include 'bone', 'dog 2 ', 'fingernail', and 'mosquito'. Note that the medial correspondence for Abui kus 'fingernail' is irregular.

Medial *k is supported by correspondence sets for 'crouch', 'short', 'good', and 'lizard'. Thus, Nedebang tuku, Western Pantar tuka, Adang toa, Klon, Kui, Wersing, Teiwa tuk < pAP *tukV 'short'. The lexeme 'lizard' is likely anIt is likely that Malay was only introduced to the Papuan speakers on Alor and Pantar through the Dutch schools that were opened in early 20 th century. For example, Dunotes that among the Abui people with whom she lived in the 1930s, Malay was only known by school children. The first Dutch schools were opened on Alor in 1906; on Pantar in the 1920sIn the Dutch schools, the language of education was Malay, as elsewhere in the Dutch East Indies.The alternation between alveolars and palatals in Adang reflects a phonemic split by which *d, *t, and *n have been palatalized following a vowel sequence ending in a high front vowel, as in 'betel vine'). Klon has non-phonemic palatalization in the same environment, while the closely related language Kabola (not in our sample) does not undergo palatalization.

Gary Holton & Laura C. Robinson

Austronesian borrowing (cf. Alorese take), perhaps explaining the anomalous reflexes Adang tk and Kamang take, the latter of which has an unexpected geminate. However, this form is geminated as expected in Western Pantar take. Final *k is retained in all languages except Blagar, Adang, Sawila, and Wersing, where it is lost entirely. Only two correspondence sets, 'one' and 'horn', support this reconstruction. Neither set has cognates in Sawila; however, final k is rare in our Sawila data set, occurring in only two forms: werpak 'frog' and kispak 'earthworm' (both lexical innovations shared with Wersing). The correspondences for final *k can be difficult to tease apart from those for medial *k, since many languages reflect later vowel epenthesis or apocope. We take the presence of a geminate in Western Pantar to be diagnostic in this regard, since Western Pantar geminates do not occur word-finally. This criterion is admittedly problematic, since it is entirely possible that vowel epenthesis preceded gemination in Western Pantar. Furthermore, Western Pantar sometimes lacks cognates for relevant lexical items, as with 'horn'.

The reconstruction of *q is supported by the presence of a post-coronal voiceless obstruent phoneme distinct from the velar stop in three Pantar languages. In Teiwa and Nedebang this is a uvular stop; in Kaera a velar fricative. Elsewhere, initial *q is reflected as /k/, with the exception of Adang, which has glottal stop, and Blagar, which shows both glottal stop and velar stop reflexes. Initial *q is found in correspondence sets for 'spear', 'itchy', and 'tens'. Blagar shows alternation between a velar and glottal reflex of *q. Note that the r in 'tens' behaves as a medial consonant since this numeral formative only occurs in compounds with following numeral, e.g., Teiwa qar nuk 'ten'.

The medial reflexes of *q are similar to those in initial position, except that Adang shows loss of medial *q. Correspondence sets supporting medial *q include 'two', 'itchy', 'white', and 'black'. Adang kak 'itchy' is anomalous, as it retains the medial consonant. Blagar madaka 'white' is in fact cognate due to a regular process of glide insertion between the vowels /i/ and /a/, followed by glide fortition: *miaqa > miaka > mijaka > madaka. The most interesting reflex of medial *q is found in Western Pantar. Unlike the other voiceless stops, the uvular stop is not reflected as a geminate in Western Pantar but instead as a non-geminate velar stop. In this regard Western Pantar patterns with the other Pantar languages in distinguishing reflexes of *q and *k.

In particular, *q provides an additional source for non-geminate intervocalic voiceless velar stops in Western Pantar. This in turn may inform reconstruction of final vowels in pAP. Since *q does not geminate in Western Pantar, Western Pantar alaku 'two' can readily be derived from *raqu, supporting reconstruction 62 2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family of the final vowel. On the other hand, Western Pantar anuku 'one' corresponds to Tw and Nd forms with velar stops, hence the reconstruction of pAP 'one' must contain a velar, not a uvular. The fact that Western Pantar anuku does not contain a geminate means that either it has been borrowed or that the vowel has been added following the gemination process. In the absence of any evidence for borrowing we reconstruct *nuk 'one' without a final vowel.