In sum, with the positive establishment of the relatedness of the Papuan languages scattered across the islands of Timor, Kisar, Alor, Pantar and the Pantar Straits, a start has been made towards a history of the TAP languages. However, we are still a long way off a complete and nuanced understanding of the family and its development (cf.statement of prospective research questions). It will be the task of future reconstructive historical work to definitively solve remaining issues in the comparative data.

Antoinette Schapper, Juliette Huber & Aone van Engelenhoven

The orthographic conventions used in the Appendices are the following: '' joins morphological variants of the same lexeme. In Appendix A.1 and Appendix A.2, material given in round brackets '( )' represents fossilized morphology or other unetymological material. In Appendix A.3, round brackets indicate that a given phoneme cannot be reconstructed with absolute certainty. Furthermore, 'N' is used to represent an unspecified nasal; 'L' an unspecified liquid, and 'Q' a putative postvelar stop for which we have only very weak evidence. An empty slot in the pTAP column means that the reconstructed pAP and pTIM forms, although clearly cognate, are too different to allow for a secure pTAP reconstruction.

A.1 Data supporting the additional pAP reconstructions

gloss bark bird bite bone clew, stone circle 3 coconut

Antoinette Schapper, Juliette Huber & Aone van Engelenhoven

The relatedness of Timor-Kisar and Alor-Pantar languages

gloss tree walk 1 walk 2 yellow 1sg 1pl

This root is possibly an Austronesian loan: PMP *lakaj 'stride, take a step'.

A.3 List of cognates and pTAP reconstruction

The linguistic position of the Timor-Alor-Pantar languages

Gary Holton

Laura C. Robinson

The wider genealogical affiliations of the Timor-Alor-Pantar languages have been the subject of much speculation. These languages are surrounded by unrelated Austronesian languages, and attempts to locate related languages have focused on Papuan languages 800 km or more distant. This chapter draws on typological, pronominal, and especially lexical evidence to examine three hypotheses regarding the higher-level affiliations of the Timor-Alor-Pantar languages: (1) the languages are related to the North Halmaheran (West Papuan) languages; (2) the languages are part of the Trans-New Guinea family; and (3) the languages are related to the West Bomberai family, with no link to Trans-NewGuinea more broadly. We rely in particular on recent reconstructions of proto-Timor-Alor-Pantar vocabulary (chapter 3). Of the hypotheses evaluated here, we find the most striking similarities between TAP and the West Bomberai family. However, we conclude that the evidence currently available is insufficient to confirm a genealogical relationship with West Bomberai or any other family, and hence, TAP must be considered a family-level isolate.

1 Introduction

The non-Austronesian languages of the Alor and Pantar islands in eastern Indonesia have been shown to form a genealogical unit (see Chapter 2) and these, in turn, have been shown to be part of a larger family which includes the nonAustronesian languages of Timor (see Chapter 3

Holton (2012).Prior to this work most authors assumed a connection to TransNew Guinea languages, based primarily on evidence from pronominal paradigms). However, several other plausible hypotheses have been proposed, which we shall examine in this chapter. The Timor-Alor-Pantar (TAP) languages are surrounded on all sides by Austronesian languages, with the nearest Papuan (non-Austronesian) language located some 800 km distant.Some putative relatives of the TAP family are shown in

In this chapter, we will consider three hypotheses about the wider relationships of the TAP family: (1) the TAP languages are related to the North Halmaheran (NH) languages; (2) the TAP languages belong to the Trans-New Guinea (TNG) family (broadly defined); and (3) the TAP languages are related to certain Papuan languages within the putative TNG family, even though the evidence linking them with TNG as a whole is indeterminate and these languages may not in fact be TNG. In order to examine the first two hypotheses we compare TAP reconstructed forms with proposed reconstructions for North Halmahera and Trans-New Guinea, respectively. In order to evaluate the third hypothesis we compare TAP reconstructions with languages from four smaller families: South Bird's Head; Wissel Lakes; Dani; and West Bomberai. Although each of these families has been claimed to be a part of some version of the larger Trans-New Guinea group, the composition of these smaller families is uncontroversial and thus allows us to evaluate potential wider affiliations while remaining agnostic as to the status of Trans-New Guinea itself. Ideally, we would compare TAP to reconstructed proto-languages for each of these four families; however, given the limited historical work done on those families, we instead choose individual languages from each family for comparison with TAP. We examine each of the three hypotheses in light of recently collected data on the TAP languages, considering pronominal, typological, and lexical evidence. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the null hypothesis that the TAP languages form a family-level isolate.