Details specific to our application of the method are laid out in

Three primary regions can be identified in the graph, each separated by significant reticulation at the center of the graph. An East Alor region groups Kamang, Wersing, and Sawila; a Central Alor region groups Kui, Klon, and Adang; and a Pantar region groups Kaera, Nedebang, Teiwa, and to a lesser extent Western Pantar. The high degree of reticulation within this latter group indicates a strong 70 2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family

conflicting signal within this region. That is, of these three regions, the Pantar group is particularly non-tree-like, suggesting a pattern of wave-like innovations in this region. In other words, although we found no shared phonological innovations to subgroup these languages together in a traditional tree based on the comparative method), these languages have borrowed a great deal from one another.

A greater degree of reticulation in the graph represents a less tree-like signal in the data. The degree of tree-like signal can be quantified using the delta score metric (The average delta score for our dataset is a moderately high  = 0.29, reflecting the fact that while some groupings do emerge in, there is significant reticulation between those groups. The most tree-like values are found in the East Alor grouping of Kamang, Wersing, and Sawila. The Pantar group of Teiwa, Kaera, and Nedebang has delta scores similar to the mean for the entire dataset; however, the value for West72 2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family ern Pantar is significantly higher, suggesting that similarities between Western Pantar and the remainder of the Pantar languages may be due more to borrowing than to shared descent. An unexpected result in the graph inis the position of Blagar as a relative isolate within the family. In contrast to the subgrouping based on the comparative method, Blagar groups not with Adang and Klon but rather with the Pantar languages-and then only weakly so.

A second method of subgrouping based on lexical characters uses Bayesian statistical techniques to search for trees which are most compatible with the cognate classes coded in our data.The results are summarized inas a maximum clade credibility tree. The clade credibility values listed below each node indicate the percentage of sampled trees which are compatible with that node. These values are for the most part either at or near one hundred percent (1.00), indicating that this consensus tree is compatible with almost all of the trees sampled in the analysis. Lower figures appear at exactly those nodes already shown to be problematic via the other subgrouping methods, namely Western Pantar, Abui, and Kamang.

To a large extent the groupings in the Bayesian tree are compatible with those in the split graph. First, Sawila (Sw) and Wersing (We) are shown to be closely related, a grouping which was also present in the classification based on the comparative methodSecond, there is a Pantar grouping of Kaera (Ke), Teiwa (Tw), Nedebang (Nd), and Western Pantar (WP). Third, the position of Blagar (Bl) at the highest node coordinate to the Alor languages is consistent with its position in the split graph, though, as noted above, this differs significantly from its position in the tree based on the traditional application of the comparative method). On the other hand, there are also some incompatibilities between the Bayesian tree and the split graph. For example, in the tree based on lexical characters Adang (Ad) and Klon (Kl) are shown forming a group without Kui (Ki), contra both the splits graph and the tree calculated using the comparative method.

Though not immediately apparent based on visual inspection of the maximum clade credibility tree in, the subgrouping based on lexical characters is also largely compatible with that based on phonological innovations. To demonstrate this we repeated the Bayesian analysis with the constraint that all sampled trees be compatible with the subgroups identified by the comparative method, keeping all other parameters constant.We then applied a marginal likelihood analysis to the results of each model, which yielded a Bayes factor of 1.1726, only slightly favoring the constrained model over the unconstrained one.The model based on lexical characters independently identifies the same subgroups found using a completely different methodology based on phonological characters, providing additional support for the robustness of the model. This lends support for those subgroups identified in the model based on lexical characters which are not found in the subgrouping based on phonological innovations. In particular, we have some evidence for the existence of an East Alor subgroup comprised of Abui (Ab), Kamang (Km), Sawila (Sw) and Wersing (We), even though this subgroup is not identified in the tree based on phonological characters.The authors thank Michael Dunn for suggesting this innovative approach.Marginal likelihood was estimated using Tracer 1.5

2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family

4 Discussion

The examination of sound correspondences across the Papuan languages of Alor and Pantar robustly supports the identification and reconstruction of an AlorPantar family. Our comparative work also allows us to propose internal subgroups within Alor-Pantar, but the overall linguistic picture is extremely complex, defying a model based solely on inheritance. Widespread multilingualism is the norm in the region, and borrowings from neighboring languages-such as Western Pantar bagis 'whine' from Deing bagis 'cry'-are extremely common.