As we have seen, the pattern of using 'male' and 'female' to derive terms for mother's brother's and father's sister's sides is shared among four of the languages which optionally distinguish cross-cousins. Upon closer examination we find a less symmetrical division between MB and FZ lines in these languages. Three of the four languages with non-obligatory cross-cousin terms have terminology which privileges the mother's lineage. Kiraman, in addition to distinguishing the MB line as nengeta also has a special term-eni which is restricted to mMBD and not mFZD. Kiraman also distinguishes MB as-mayira distinct from F, while FZ is classed with M. Kamang distinguishes the mother's side with the modifier ela 'base'. Thus,-paa ela 'MB' is distinct from-paa 'F'. In contrast, FZ is classed with M as-auko. Finally, Adang distinguishes the mother's brother's line as asel, a term which applies across generations and may denote MB as well as MBC. Only Abui lacks asymmetrical terminology distinguishing MB.

At this point it is helpful to consider the geographic distribution of the languages according to whether cross-cousins are obligatorily distinguished. Those languages with non-obligatory distinction of cross-cousins are spoken in a nearly contiguous area across the heart of Alor (see). This region is probably even more contiguous than it appears in the figure, since Kabola, spoken in the region between Adang and Abui, has a kinship system very similar to that of Adang. Much of this region is extremely mountainous, rugged, and isolated.

In contrast, those languages which obligatorily distinguish cross-cousins from siblings are restricted to Pantar and the neighboring small island of Pura. These are primarily coastal and lowland areas (or at least places with easy access to the coast) which would have had substantially more contact with Alorese, the language spoken by Austronesian migrants who arrived in Alor during the last millennium). In this context it is notable that Alorese has a symmet

Both maternal and paternal crosscousins are referred to as opung and may be distinguished for gender: opung kafae 'female cross-cousin' versus opung kalake 'male cross-cousin'. Moreover, these cross-cousin terms are used for affine (in-law) relations as well, yielding equations characteristic of a symmetric system. For example, opung kalake is both mother's brother and wife's father. The equation MB = WF implies that a man's wife must be his cross-cousin, since his mother's brother is the classificatory father of his wife. These same equations hold in Western Pantar and Teiwa, though not in the other languages, which largely retain reflexes of the original pAP affine term *dat (see). This suggests that in Western Pantar and Teiwa the original affine term has been replaced by the cross-cousin term under pressure from a shift to a symmetric alliance system. Marriage practices may also be a result of contact with Alorese. Preference for cross-cousin marriage is strongest among the westernmost languages Western Pantar, Teiwa, and Blagar-i.e., those languages which have likely had the most contact with Alorese. The preference for cross-cousin marriage is strongest in Western Pantar, where the equation W = MBD = FZD holds, with the result that all marriages are treated as if they were between cross-cousins. At the other end of the spectrum, Kamang explicitly forbids marriage between cross-cousins.

Gary Holton

In the more remote regions of central Alor, people view the concept of crosscousin marriage as a coastal practice, often choosing to refer to it by its local Malay designation, lake ruma-bini ruma, literally 'house husband-house wife', rather than using equivalent terms from their own languages. Among Kamang speakers, where such marriages are explicitly forbidden, discussion of this relationship generated derisive laughter. Among Abui speakers there is an attitude of ambivalence. One speaker noted that "some people do that now, and the elders have seen that it is okay".

Further evidence that the preference for cross-cousin marriage is an innovation comes from the prevalence of terms for spouse's sibling which are distinct from terms for cross-cousin (seeabove). In a system of direct exchange based on cross-cousin marriage we would expect cross-cousins to be equated with affines in ego's generation, for, in such a system, ego's spouse's sibling should also be a cross-cousin. Yet this equation again holds only in the westernmost languages, where obligatory cross-cousin distinctions have emerged.

Taken together this evidence, while admittedly circumstantial, suggests that the Alor-Pantar kinship system was originally non-prescriptive, with no distinctions between siblings and cousins. These systems then underwent drift toward prescriptive systems under influence of the Austronesian migrants. Some evolved asymmetric systems with preference for maternal cross-cousin marriage; while others evolved symmetric systems. Whether or not this historical scenario is correct must await further data and analysis. In the meantime it can be hoped that the data presented here go some way toward providing a fuller picture of kinship terminology in Alor-Pantar. Whatever the exact nature of proto-AlorPantar kinship may have been, it is clear that the family today shows enormous variation in both kinship terminology and practice, in spite of the fact that the various language communities are closely bound together through ties of marriage alliance. The Alor-Pantar languages thus provide fertile ground for the investigation of the ways kinship systems may evolve.