7 Numeral systems in the Alor-Pantar languages

In most AP languages, 'six' is morphologically simple, but in a subset of the languages bi-morphemic 'six'has been innovated ( ยง 5.1). The numerals 'seven', 'eight', and 'nine' show more complex histories, with some being historically constructed by addition to a quinary base [5+n] and others by subtraction from a decimal base [10-n] ( ยง 5.2).

5.1 Numeral 'six': Simplex and compound forms

In most AP languages, the form 'six' is mono-morphemic, as shown in

It is generally assumed that a base-five system originates from counting the fingers of one hand. In such a system, the numeral 'six' often involves crossing over from one hand to the other, 9 and may etymologically be related to words like 'cross over'). Synchronic evidence that pAP *talam may have been such a 'cross-over' verb comes from Sawila, which has a modern form talama 'step on, change legs in dance'.

AP compounds for 'six' are composed of two juxtaposed numeral morphemes. In several AP languages, compounds for 'six' have replaced etymological *talam 'six'. There appears to have been three independent innovations of this kind. One area where this has happened is eastern Alor, represented by Sawila, Kula and Wersing inKula, Sawila and Wersing-Kolana have replaced *talam 'six' with a base-five compound, as set out in (3). Whereas Sawila and Kula use 'one' in the compounds, the morpheme nu used in Wersing-Kolana for the '[plus] one' part of the compound is not identical to the synchronic numeral 'one', which is no. Rather, nu appears to be a reflex of a distinct pAP lexeme *naku 'single', which is reflected in, for example, Kamang nuku 'single', and Western Pantar nakki 'single'.

As these three languages are in close contact with each another, it is likely that the innovative use of a base-five compound for 'six' has diffused among them. This has probably happened relatively recently, since the members of the compounds are transparently related to existing cardinals. Older compounds show more divergence between the compound members and the individual numerals these derive from (cf. the formally less transparent base-five compounds

5.2 Numerals 'seven' to 'nine'

The AP languages invariably have compound forms for 'seven', 'eight', 'nine', 'ten' and the decades. The compounds are constructed in two distinct ways. One is the additive base-five compound [5+n] ( ยง 5.2.1), the second a subtractive baseten compound [10-n] ( ยง 5.2.2).

5.2.1 Additive base-five compounds

Numerals 'seven' to 'nine' that are historically formed as additive base-five numeral (i.e.,

The languages of central-east Alor construct 'seven' to 'nine' with an additive base-five system that is synchronically transparent. That is, speakers of these languages readily parse their numerals 'seven' to 'nine' as being composed of the synchronic numeral 'five' followed by 'two', 'three', or 'four', as set out in (5).

By contrast, languages of the Pantar subgroup have compounds for numerals 'seven' through 'nine' that are synchronically non-transparent. The patterns found across the Pantar languages show certain regularities, indicating that the reductions were probably already present in their immediate ancestor, protoPantar (pP). 10 In (6) we present the reconstructed numeral compounds and their constituent numeral roots. Only the major changes leading to the forms in the modern languages are detailed here.

The final segments /in/ of pP *jiwasin 'five' were already lost in pP 'seven'. This was followed by the loss of (probably unstressed) medial /wa/ in the subgroup containing Sar, Teiwa and Kaera (proto-Central Pantar, pCP). In the pP-forms of 'eight' and 'nine', medial /we/ of *jewasin 'five' was lost, as well as the final /a/The sub-groups within the AP group that we name here are based purely on evidence from formal and phonological (often sporadic and/or irregular) changes shared between languages in their numerals. The reconstruction of pAP inis too preliminary and coarse-grained to pick up any real subgrouping evidence. We take the detailed study of numerals that we make here to be indicative of how we may go about identifying AP subgroups in the future.

Antoinette Schapper & Marian Klamer of *(a)tiga 'three'. In pCP 'eight' and 'nine', a metathesis of /an/ to /na/ occured,followed by a reduction of the resulting /sn/ cluster to /s/ in the group containing Sar and Kaera (proto-Central East Pantar, pCEP).