2 Kin terminology

In the following subsections the inventory of kinship terminology is described for each of the eight languages in the sample. The descriptions begin with terminology in ego's generation and then proceeds to ascending generations, descending generations, and finally affines (kin related by marriage). A summary table of kinship terms for each language is found at the end of each subsection. 1 Since most kinship terms are obligatorily possessed in Alor-Pantar languages, the terms are cited here as bound morphemes. Full forms inflected for first-person can be derived by adding the first-person singular prefix, which is composed of an alveolar nasal plus a vowel whose quality varies by language (n-/na-/no-/ne-). Thus, Western Pantar-iar 'father'; niar 'my father'.

Gary Holton

2.1 Western Pantar

Western Pantar has the most elaborated set of sibling/cousin terms of any language described here. A single terminology for siblings and parallel cousins includes five terms distinguished by age and relative gender (seeat the end of this section). Same-sex elder siblings are distinguished for gender, while same-sex younger siblings are not distinguished for gender. Opposite-sex siblings are not distinguished for age. The formal similarity between the formaipang 'man's sister' and-aiyang 'woman's brother' is probably not accidental. These terms likely derive from the possessive pronoun formative ai (cf. nai 'mine', gai 'his/her') plus pang 'non-marriageable of ego's generation' and yang 'return from above'. So a man's sister is "that of mine which is non-marriageable"; while a woman's brother is "that of mine which descends from above", i.e., that which comes down from my descent group.

Children of same-sex siblings are classed as siblings, whereas children of oppositesex siblings are cross-cousins. The same-sex cross-cousin terms in Western Pantar are mutually exclusive; that is, there is no general cross-cousin term which subsumes the others. Thus,-'ar 'man's male cross-cousin' and-ingtamme 'woman's female cross-cousin' refer only to same-sex, non-marriageable cross-cousins. In contrast, the term for opposite-sex cross-cousin is independent of the gender of the ego and referent. The term baddang 'opposite-sex cross-cousin' is often described as meaning 'marriageable' and represents the closest marriageable relationship, often said to be the ideal marriage. The terminology in ego's generation thus differs according to whether the ego is female

The term-ai tane is synonymous with baddang, though it is not used as a vocative. This term likely derives from an archaic word ne 'body' with a fossilized distributive possessive prefix ta. It is possessed using the alienable possessive paradigm, thus, nai tane 'my marriageable cross-cousin', or more literally, 'that of our body'. Marriageable cross-cousins may also be referred to (though not

addressed) by the term wallang, a more general term which refers to the entire mother's brother's or father's sister's descent group, including the marriageable cross-cousins. The term wallang contrasts with pang, which refers to ego's own descent group. The exchange of women from one's own descent group to one's wallang is highlighted in the common expression pang wallang gar da'ai 'one from our clan shared with the opposite clan', a figurative reference to a woman who marries outside the clan.

There is some skewing of terms in the first ascending generation. Same-sex siblings of one's parents are classed as parents, but there is no entirely separate term distinguishing father's sister from mother's brother. Mother's brother is-irasi (vocative dasi). Father's sister can also be referred to as-irasi but is more likely to be called by the modified term-irasi manne or-irasi eu (cf. manne 'wife', eu 'woman'). These latter terms can also denote the spouse of-irasi, while the spouse of-irasi manne is-irasi ammu (ammu 'man') or simply-irasi. The descending term-airas refers to children of one's opposite-sex siblings. Thus,-irasi and-airas are reciprocal terms. Informulation-irasi andairas denote potential parents-in-law and potential children-in-law, respectively. Indeed, these terms are used for affines as well, using the equations MB = WF and FZ = WM, characteristic of a symmetric system of marriage alliance (see ยง 4). That is, one's spouse's parents are denoted by the same terms used for one's parent's opposite-sex siblings, since ideally one's spouse would be the offspring of one's parent's opposite-sex sibling, i.e., a cross-cousin.