In sum, AP languages derive distributive numerals by partial or full reduplication of the cardinal. In complex numerals, the right-most element is the prosodic head and as a rule this item is the base for the reduplication. Exceptions to the regular derivations of distributives are mainly found in the formation of the morphologically complex low numerals 'six' through 'nine' in Central-East Alor, and include segmental changes in reduplicated forms (Abui); irregular patterns of reduplication, and an irregular choice of reduplicative base (Kamang).

3 Structures expressing arithmetic operations

To complete the catalogue of numeral expressions in AP languages, this section presents the basic arithmetic operations in which numbers are combined. We describe addition (section 3.1), subtraction (section 3.2), multiplication (section 3.3), division (section 3.4), and fractions (section 3.5). To elicit math constructions from speakers was generally easy and not forced at all. This is remarkable in light of the fact that for none of the languages is it the case that children acquire or use these arithmetic expressions in school: the language of education in Alor-Pantar is Indonesian.

3.1 Addition

Across Alor-Pantar, addition takes the shape of imperative sentences involving more than one verb. In such constructions, the agent or actor is not expressed and the added numerals are the arguments of verbs in a serial construction. The8 Numeral words and arithmetic operations in the Alor-Pantar languages number that represents the sum amount is a predicate that follows a clausecoordinating element. Languages may abbreviate the expression by omitting a verb or the clause-coordinator.

3.2 Subtraction

Just like addition, subtraction is also expressed in imperative sentences. Syntactically, the subtrahend (i.e., the numeral subtracted) is expressed as the complement of transitive verbs such as 'throw away X', 'split off X', 'move X', or 'take X'. The grammatical role of the minuend (i.e., the numeral subtracted from) is less clear. As is the case with the sum of addition, the result of the subtraction typically occurs as the predicate of a separate clause, following a clause coordinating element. Examples (25) through (30) illustrate 'five minus two is three':

A.2 Numeral Questionnaire used in the field

A.2.1 Numerals

It is preferred to elicit the data for this questionnaire using words and constructions in the language of investigation as much as possible. The Malay examples below are not given as prompts to be translated, but rather as additional background for you to help you steer a discussion in Malay. Expressions containing numerals and ordinals, and morphological derivations relating to numerals and ordinals in the AP languages are expected to be quite different from what they are in Malay.

A.2.2 Tasks

1. Ask a person to count in sequence from 1-20 and record this.

2. Elicit 1-100 on paper. Appendix 1: answer sheet.

3. Elicit higher cardinals 2000, 3000,, 10.000. Appendix 2: answer sheet.

4. Elicit 100-1000 on paper. Suggestion: You could give (a) speaker(s) an

empty notebook to work on this at their leisure at home. After they have written up all the numbers, please go over it, to check

 if the writing is legible

 if you know which letter is used for which sound

 if this letter-sound correspondence in their orthography is consistent (or consistent enough to be used by us)

 if there are any (possible) morphemes or morpheme boundaries that need additional elicitation or discussion-these notes can go with the manuscript.

5. Elicit expressions for basic calculations if any exist:

 3 + 3 = 6: 3 tambah 3 sama dengan enam

 5-2 = 3: lima kurang dua sama dengan tiga

 4 x 5 = 20: empat kali lima sama dengan dua puluh

7. Is there any agreement morphology between numeral and noun?

8. Note down the distribution of cardinals as predicate (in 'predicative' function), if they are used as such, e.g.:

 Waktu itu kami masih bertiga 'At that time we were still three';

 Mereka datang berlima, berdua mereka pergi 'They came with five and left with two'

9. If cardinals may be used in predicative function, can a higher numeral also be used as such? Note that this not generally possible in Malay, where the predicative ber-construction is not productively used with higher numerals: *Waktu itu kami berdua puluh. Instead one would say Waktu itu kami duapuluh orang 'We were twenty at the time'.

 Check e.g.10. In Malay, certain particular high cardinals do appear in the ber-construction: Kami akan datang berseribu 'we will come (as) a (group of) thousand'. So perhaps a language does not treat all higher cardinals in the same way.