It is very likely that these coastal populations were the Austronesian Alorese ( § 2.2).

One of the earliest written records is a Portuguese missionary text written after 1642, where Pantar (referred to as ") is mentioned as a place inhabited by pagans and Muslims, together with Lewotolok and Kedang on Lembata island, located west of Pantar. Alor (referred to as "Malua") is described as an unattractive place, with few opportunities for trade and a pagan cannibal populationIt is certain that in ancient times there was traffic back and forth between Alor, Pantar, Timor, and the islands west of Pantar: traders in Kalikur, a port in north Lembata, heard from Alor traders about famous Timorese warriors who were brought to Kedang, also in north Lembata, to suppress villages of the island's interior

Ships of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) rarely ventured to Pantar and Alor. It was traders from Portugal who bought local products in exchange for iron, cutlasses, and axesIn the early 18 th century, Portugal attempted to establish a base on Alor. Some fifty black Portuguese soldiers (originally from Africa) travelled from Larantuka in East Flores, landed in Pandai (north Pantar) in 1717 and built a church and a settlement thereThe Portuguese made some "treaties" with local rulers, but their influence remained limited to some coastal regions in north Pantar and west Alor.1 The Alor-Pantar languages: Linguistic context, history and typology ing in the Portuguese serviso 'work' (Kratochvíl, field notes). In addition, many songs in central-east Alor mention place names such as Likusaen and Maubara, which are located in the north of Timor, hundreds and possibly thousands of highlanders in Alor and Pantar were marched to Kalabahi and killed by the Indonesian forces and associated vigilantes after the alleged communist coup. Oral accounts of the atrocities still circulate among the population and the terror is palpable whenever such accounts are shared.

4.3 Contact

All of the Alor-Pantar languages show some traces of contact with Austronesian languages, but in general, borrowing from Austronesian has not been very intense. Contact with Malay and Indonesian is a relatively recent phenomenon in most of the Alor-Pantar languages. Comparing 160 vocabulary items in 13 AP languages, Robinson (2015) finds Austronesian loan percentages to range between 4.2% (in Western Pantar) and 9.5% (in Blagar and Adang), while the majority of AP languages have only 6-7% of Austronesian loans.Of course, lexical borrowing within the Alor-Pantar family occurs as well. An example is Western Pantar bagis 'to wail', borrowed from Deing bagis 'to cry'). In situations where speakers of sister languages are also geographical neighbors and in contact with each other, it is however exceedingly difficult to distinguish loans from cognates.

5 Typological overview

This section presents a general overview of the structural features of the AlorPantar languages. The aim is to introduce the reader to their phonology, morphology and syntax, pointing out patterns that are cross-linguistically common and patterns that are rare. Where appropriate, I refer to chapters in this volume for further discussion or illustration.

Marian Klamer

5.1 Phonology

The sizes of the vowel and consonant inventories of the AP languages are transitional between the smaller vowel systems and large consonant systems of insular Southeast Asia, and the more complex vowel systems but much more reduced consonant inventories to the east, in the wider New Guinea/Oceania region (cf.

The vowel systems in Alor-Pantar involve the five cardinal vowels, possibly adding distinctions in mid vowels (e.g. Klon, Adang) and/or in length (e.g. Teiwa, Abui, Kamang). The proto-Alor-Pantar consonant inventory () is shown in

If it is the case that Papuan languages usually lack a distinction between /r/ and /l/ (, see § 5.9), then the languages of Timor, Alor and Pantar are atypical in universally distinguishing /r/ from /l/. At least two liquids must be reconstructed to proto-Timor-Alor-Pantar, the immediate parent of pAP. Interestingly, however, *r and *l occur in complementary distribution in the reconstructed phonology of proto-AP (

Within the Alor-Pantar family, consonant inventories are largest in Pantar, where Teiwa has 20 consonants, and Western Pantar has 16 consonants plus 10 geminates. The inventories decrease in size towards the eastern part of Alor, where Abui has 16 (native) consonants, and Kamang has 14.

While the consonant inventories of the AP languages are rather similar to each other, some variation is found in the number of fricatives and nasals. In Pantar we find consonants unique to the family: the Western Pantar geminate stops, the Teiwa pharyngeal fricative //, the Teiwa uvular stop /q/, the Kaera velar fricative /x/, and the Blagar implosive voiced bilabial stop //. The pharyngeal fricative in particular is cross-linguistically rather uncommon (found in 2.4% of the languages of Maddieson's (2005) sample).