The second mechanism of elaboration of sets of elevation-marked terms is compounding basic terms together to create "mediated" distinctions. Consider the forms of the Sawila elevational motion verbs presented in

In the high and low domains we see that there are not the expected two terms each, but instead five each. The direct terms denoting movement along an axis following the line of a slope straight up or straight down reflect individual pAP elevation terms. The indirect terms denote a movement that traverses across the slope diagonally and are formed by compounding different proto-terms together. The compounding process is not completely regular: there is some inconsistency in the terms that are compounded together in the verbs denoting motion toward the dc. 9 Nevertheless, the etymologies for the terms are clear, as set out in Table 18.

Kamang presents a more complex example of system elaboration, involving compounding of terms across all elevational word classes not just verbs, as well as paradigm regularization. Looking at the forms of Kamang elevation-marked terms in, we see particular morphemic "atoms" are used to build up the elaborated terms in a semi-regular manner. direct terms are simplest, being built thus: (i) the elevational domain is marked by a single consonant t-for high, either f-or y-for low and either m-or w-for level, and (ii) the word class is

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages marked by-u- for elevationals, by-e for elevational motion verb from dc and by-aa for elevational motion verb from the dc. This pattern is perfectly illustrated by Kamang's high direct terms: tu 'high.drct', te 'go.high.drct' and taa 'come.high.drct'. Of these, only tu is inherited from pAP, while te and taa are Kamang innovations following the pattern of morphemic atoms. Irregularities in the formation of non-compounded elevation terms in Kamang stem from cases in which the morphemic atoms have not been fully applied (as explained further below), and instead there is retention of etymological forms.presents an overview of the non-compounded elevation terms in Kamang, followed by their expected but non-occurring form (marked with **) if they were formed on the morphemic atom pattern, and their relationship to pAP terms., we see that the appearance of both m-and w-in the formation of level motion verbs is a result of the retention of reflexes of pAP *wai 'go.level' alongside *mai 'come.level'. If the formation of these terms were to conform to the atomic pattern, we would find the forms **me and **maa instead. In the low domain, fu and fe are inherited terms that follow the morphemic atom pattern, while yaa is a retention of a reflex of pAP *yaa() that does not conform to the pattern expected when using the morphemic atoms.

Antoinette Schapper

These basic forms that are established by this set in Kamang are then compounded together to create complex indirect terms in the high and low domains. Near indirect terms are built by prefixing the level morpheme onto the direct term of the corresponding word class, while far indirect terms are built by prefixing the direct morpheme onto the level morpheme of the corresponding word class. The composition of these terms is set out inAlso, in this set of compounds, we find irregularity: the expected form **meyaa for 'come.low.indrct.near' does not appear, instead yaame is used for near and far indirect motion. This gap in the Kamang paradigm shows that the elaboration of such systems is not as regular as we might anticipate for a process in which morphemes are so transparent.

6 Elevation in the spatial deictic systems of Alor-Pantar languages In sum, AP languages have elaborated the inherited elevational system by bringing innovative new terms often alongside reflexes of terms from the protosystem and/or by combining reflexes of the original system together to create complex forms with "mediated" (i.e., indirect or diagonal directions) semantics.

5 Conclusion

All AP languages have rich systems of spatial deixis with elevation components. The languages show significant similarity in the basic, core system in which elevation terms occur, namely, in both a verbal and non-verbal domain consistently contrasting level, high, and low elevations. The shared characteristics of the systems can be traced back to a paradigm of elevationals and a paradigm of elevational motion verbs in the ancestral language, pAP. Despite their common origin, modern AP elevational systems display noteworthy differences in the number of terms, paradigms and semantic features they have. Individual languages have complicated the basic system by: (i) reiterating the elevational distinction in multiple, additional domains (e.g., Blagar, Western Pantar), (ii) adding additional terms through innovative morphology (e.g., Adang l-elevationals), or (iii) compounding basic terms together to create more distinctions (e.g., Kamang, Sawila). The result is that the AP languages today display the kind of diversity in the details of their morphology, syntax and semantics of their elevational systems that is typical of other domains in the group.