Medial gemination is a characteristic feature of Western Pantar; most pAP stops (including nasal stops) are geminated in medial position in Western Pantar (transcribed here as long consonants b, d, etc.). We infer that modern nongeminate medial stops in Western Pantar reflect either borrowing or innovation that took place after the gemination process. In modern Western Pantar there is a robust phonemic contrast between geminate and non-geminate consonants, as 57 Gary Holton & Laura C. Robinson between duba 'slippery' and duba 'push. ' Phonetic geminates do occur in some other AP languages, notably Nedebang and Sawila; however, there is little evidence that geminates have phonemic status in those languages. Furthermore, only in Western Pantar do we find geminates as a regular reflex of pAP medial stops; elsewhere they occur only sporadically.

Evidence for *b in final position is based only on a single reconstruction for 'wave'. In, 'fish', 'tongue', 'sugarcane', and 'wave' were all reconstructed with a final *b, but with many of the cognates containing final vowels which we assumed were epenthetic. External evidence from Timor languages (seehas forced us to reconstruct those final vowels for 'fish', 'tongue', and 'sugarcane'. It is possible that 'wave' also had a final vowel in pAP, though we have insufficient evidence to reconstruct that at this time.

The variation in Teiwa and Nedebang between voiced and voiceless reflexes of non-initial *b appears to be unconditioned. Nedebang bova 'wave' has a voiced fricative, while afi 'fish' has a voiceless fricative.notes that while // and /v/ are distinct phonemes in Teiwa, the voiced variant is quite rare. The sporadic voicing seen in these correspondence sets may reflect a recent phonemicization of /v/.

In initial and medial positions *d is reflected as /r/ in Abui and as /t/ in Kamang. The other languages retain /d/, with the exception of Western Pantar which has a geminate in medial position, as expected. When the final vowel is lost, Teiwa, Nedebang, Western Pantar, and Kui reflect *d > r.

Initial *d correspondences are found in 'rat', 'sing', 'bird', and 'slippery'. Thus, Teiwa dur, Western Pantar di, Abui rui, Kamang tui < pAP *dur 'rat'. Medial *d correspondences are found in 'to plant', 'bat', 'right (side)', 'throw', 'fire', 'sun', and 'body hair'. Thus, Teiwa mdi, Western Pantar made, Abui marel, Kamang matei < pAP *madel 'bat'. The unexpected Kaera form wer 'sun' is likely a borrowing from neighboring Teiwa or Nedebang, as *d is more regularly reflected as /d/ in final position, as in od 'throw' and ad 'fire'. On the other hand, Nedebang mara and Kaera merei 'bat' unexpectedly have /r/ in medial position. These forms may reflect a borrowing (from Abui); alternatively, these forms may have a more complex history in which final syllables were originally lost, leading these forms to be treated as final.

Evidence for *d in final position is based on a single correspondence set for 'garden', which is not even reconstructed to pAP. As with *b, evidence for final *d was considerably weakened in light of external evidence from Timor. The forms 'throw', 'fire', and 'sun' have all been revised to contain final vowels. 58 2 The internal history of the Alor-Pantar language family Initial *g is reflected as a glottal stop in Blagar and Adang, and as a glottal fricative in Abui. However, the reconstruction of initial *g hinges entirely on the correspondence of third person prefixal forms in pAP. These forms exhibit vowel grading which distinguishes singular, plural, genitive, and locative. In particular, all instances of initial /g/ in modern AP languages can be traced to third person pronouns. Only the third-singular bound pronoun *ga has reflexes in all languages. The third plural is attested in a few languages and can be tentatively reconstructed as *gi-. It is absent in the modern AP languages Adang, Klon, Kamang, and Abui, which have generalized their reflexes of the pAP third person singular prefix to both singular and plural contexts. A third reflex of initial *g is found in the third person genitive marker *ge(-) which indexes alienable possessors (in contrast to *ga-, which indexes inalienable possessors). The reconstruction of genitive *ge(-) is supported by the presence of reflexes in a robust geographical spread of AP languages. A final correspondence set supporting *g is found in the third person locative prefix in several languages of Alor. There is no evidence for this prefix in the languages of Pantar (Teiwa, Nedebang, Kaera, Western Pantar, Blagar), and we do not reconstruct it to pAP. Note that Kamang has a regular change of initial *g to /w/ before back vowels, hence the form wo-.