These descending generation terms reveal the asymmetry in the Abui system. The mother's side, through the mother's brother, is viewed as elder, while the father's side, through the father's sister, is viewed as a child. This distinction is further reflected throughout various ceremonial obligations. Mayol fala must always respect neng fala, while neng fala cares for mayol fala in an endearing way. Ascending terms in Abui distinguish siblings of one's biological parents via the modifiers fing 'elder, eldest' and kokda 'younger'. There is no distinction between opposite-sex and same-sex siblings of one's parents.

Affine terms in Abui depend on the relative gender of the referent. Oppositesex affines are-biena. Male affines are-raata. Female affines are-mooi. These terms remain the same for ego's generation as well as for ascending and descending generations. Thus,-raata denotes a man's wife's brother and the reciprocal, a man's sister's husband; and-raata also denotes a man's wife's father and the reciprocal, a man's daughter's husband. The opposite-sex affine term-biena can also be used by spouses of opposite-sex siblings to refer to each other.

A distinct term-mool is used by women to refer to their husband's other wives. This term may also be used by women who are married to brothers, likely reflecting traditional levirate marriage. Further evidence of this practice can be found in the traditional Abui adage, moknehi haba amool ri 'sisters become amool', said when two sisters either marry two brothers or marry a single husband.

Abui shares with Kamang ( ยง 2.7) an elaborate distinction in generational levels, distinguishing three descending and four ascending generations, as shown in

Gary Holton

5 Kinship in the Alor-Pantar languages

Kamang kinship is described bybased on the Ateita dialect. The system described here is based on variants spoken in Apui and neighboring Silaipui districts, drawing on field work in 2010 and 2013. The two descriptions generally agree, though Stokhof is often more restrictive in delineating the semantics of certain terms. For example, Stokhof restricts the gender-based terms for ego's generation (-namuk 'same-sex sibling/cousin' and-naut 'opposite-sex sibling/cousin') to those linked through the ego's father's side. My consultants report no such restriction. This broader interpretation is also found in, where-namuk is defined as "same sex cousin, FBS/FZS for male or FBD/FZD for female". It may well be that the Kamang system has bleached somewhat in the four decades since Stokhof's research was conducted, so that terms which were once restricted to father's side have broadened to include both mother's and father's side.

A slightly different example type of discrepancy can be found in the terms-namuk ela and-naut ela, which bothdefine as cross-cousins on the mother's side. There is some disagreement about these terms among my consultants. Some speakers reject the terms altogether preferring instead to use the cross-cousin term lammi. Others accept the terms but acknowledge that the unmodified versions-namuk and-naut can also be used in this context. Most likely there are two overlapping terminological systems at work here: one distinguishing cross-cousins via the lammi/malemi terminology; and the other distinguishing the mother's side via ela. Nonetheless, Kamang today as described here still maintains significant skewing toward the maternal side in the first ascending generation.

Kamang has two primary sets of terminology for ego's generation. The first is age-based, distinguishing-naka 'elder sibling/cousin' and-kak 'younger sibling/cousin'. These terms are synonymous with-idama and-idika, respectively, and these latter terms are more commonly used in their vocative form, dama and dika, respectively. A second set of terminology is gender-based and distinguishes-namuk 'same-sex sibling/cousin' from-naut 'opposite-sex sibling/cousin'. The same-sex term-namuk is less likely to be used to indicate biological siblings, in which case the age-based terms are preferred. The term-namuk can be used more generally as a friendly way of greeting persons of the same gender as ego, even if not closely related. For both sets of terminology a biological sibling (or at least closer) relationship can be indicated by compounding the terms with kang. Thus, nenaut kang 'my (male speaking) sister' (See

Gary Holton

While Stokhof reports the use of the gender-based terms for cross-cousins as well as parallel cousins, my consultants prefer to limit the use of these terms to parallel cousins (and siblings). A different set of terminology is used for crosscousins, distinguishing lammi 'maternal cross-cousin' (MBC) and malemi 'paternal cross-cousin' (FZC). These terms are not distinguished for gender, the gender of either ego or referent, but they are reciprocal, so that if A calls B lammi, then B calls A malemi. In contrast to other Alor-Pantar languages, there is a strong taboo against marriage between cross-cousins (see ยง 4). The cross-cousin terms are not used as terms of address except in very specific formal contexts; instead, the usual age-based sibling terms are used. The lammi-malemi relationship is inherited through generations, so that the children of lammi and malemi also refer to each other as lammi and malemi. However, the restriction on marriage between lammi and malemi expires after three generations.