that are reconstructed as basically consonant final in pAP, because of the lack of stop gemination in Western Pantar. In each case, we have between three and nine reflexes in modern AP languages with a V(C) following the supposed historically final consonant. We must ask ourselves where so many additional final segments came from in so many of these languages.

we would expect to be able to predict the type of the epenthetic vowel from the shape of the root, but this is not the case; instead, the epenthetic vowels are of all different values from one item to the next and bear no apparent relationship to the vowel of the root (as defined by). What is more, the final V(C) elements we observe in AP languages are not erratic, rather they in general adhere to correspondences observed elsewhere. This suggests that these final V(C) elements were not epenthetic to the items after the break-up of pAP, but have been inherited from pAP. This is further supported by the fact that we find clearly corresponding V(C) segments on cognate vocabulary in TK languages, meaning that the segments reconstruct to pTAP and that they were inherited into pAP. The alternative leaves us without explanation for the cognacy of the final segments in these (and other) items across the family.

Antoinette Schapper, Juliette Huber & Aone van Engelenhoven

120 3 The relatedness of Timor-Kisar and Alor-Pantar languages

The problem then is how to explain medial geminate and non-geminate stops in Western Pantar. One answer would be to maintain that the difference in stop gemination was still due to a final versus non-final distinction. For example, it could be said that the loss of the final vowel occurred after the breakup of pAP but prior to the application of the gemination rule. This cannot, however, be fully sustained as WP has in some cases final vowels which clearly reflect pTAP and pAP (e.g., 'tongue'). A more attractive explanation is presented by stressinduced gemination. Although little is known about the historical prosody of TAP, it seems a good possibility that Western Pantar gemination may have been a result of final stress. This scenario is supported by and elaborated in Heston's (2016) analysis of pTAP stress, according to which closed final syllables attracted stress. Western Pantar geminate stops occur predictably before stressed final vowels (even if the syllable in question is no longer closed in modern Western Pantar). This analysis explains the lack of gemination in our examples in, with the exception of pTAP *lebur 'tongue' and *wasin 'tooth'. With respect to the latter,notes that his stress-based account does not hold for geminate s and l. The former case remains unexplained.

A second issue for the pAP reconstruction is the presence of many unexplained phonemes in a range of environments in different languages. Velar, post-velar and laryngeal consonants are a case in point. Most of the complexity in this domain is found in the languages of Pantar and the Pantar Straits, whose phoneme inventories generally include not only velar and glottal stops, but also uvular ones, as well as a velar or pharyngeal fricative next to the glottal fricative /h/. This contrasts with the situation as found in most of Alor and the TK languages, which tend to be rather simpler.

this domain in AP still is, and serves as a reminder that much more extensive reconstruction work needs to be undertaken. A similar issue is presented by the phonemic velar nasal // in many AP languages. This phoneme is not reconstructed for pAP, and is also absent in all of the TK languages. According to, pAP *n became // in word-final position in all AP languages except Teiwa, where it was retained as /n/. This historical scenario does work well for some languages, for instance, Wersing, whereis synchronically a word-final allophone of /n/. However, in other languages, questions remain. For instance, Kamang has an unexplained contrast between // and /n/ in codas (e.g., ee '2sg.poss' versus een '2sg.foc'). Similarly, the existence of // in coda and medial position in Teiwa is unexplained, as well as the occurrence of // in other positions than the final one in various languages (e.g. Sar laja 'digging stick' and Kula apa 'father').

Vowels also present a major challenge to the reconstruction of the ancestral TAP language. The various vowel systems as illustrated inare yet to be historically reconciled with one another. Most AP languages have a length distinction in their vowels: the most common system is 5 short and 5 long cardinal vowels (Kaera, Blagar, Abui and Kamang), though matching long vowels may be missing in the mid-vowel range (Teiwa and Klon). Blagar has a marginal length distinction with only a small number of items occurring with long vowels), while it is Klon's short mid-vowels that are marginal. A length distinction is entirely absent from Western Pantar's and Wersing's five vowel system and Adang's seven vowel system. A relationship, if any, between the mid-vowels in Adang and length distinctions in other languages remains to 122 3 The relatedness of Timor-Kisar and Alor-Pantar languages be established. Non-cardinal vowels are found in Sawila /y, y/ and in Klon //. TK languages all have simple five cardinal vowels and there is a marginal length distinction in only one language, Makalero. Stress in conjunction with length appears to have played an important role in vowel histories. For instance, Klon // seems to originate in a short, unstressed pAP *a (e.g., Klon bi appears to go back to pAP *habi 'fish'). In Wersing, historically short unstressed vowels are lost in words with long vowels, which in turn become short stressed vowels (e.g., Wersing tlam appears to go back to pAP *talam 'six', cf. Abui talama). In short, much careful bottom-up reconstructive work needs to be done in order to reconcile these different systems to a single ancestral system (see Heston 2016 for a more complete stress-related account of Klon // and Heston forthcoming for a preliminary reconstruction of pTAP vowels).