For Kedang on north Lembata, however, we are on a firmer ground to say that it formed its numeral 'nine' on the basis of the quinary patterns used for 'six' through 'nine' in the AP languages of northern Pantar, which is located just east of the Kedang speaking area on Lembata (see). Note that the Lamaholot dialects spoken around Kedang in south and west Lembata all lack quinary numerals (see Appendix A.2) so that Kedang 'nine' stands out as being different from its immediate Austronesian neighbours. In his ethnographic study of the Kedang,noted that the Kedang speakers are culturally very different from the Lamaholot groups on Lembata, instead showing cultural similarities with the AP groups of Alor and Pantar. For instance, unlike the Lamaholot, the Kedang are known for 'the number of gongsown and especially in the fact thatare used as bridewealth', which is also a common practice in AP groups. The unique quinary form of Kedang 'nine' may well be a trace of cultural contact between Kedang and AP speakers on Pantar, for instance in bridewealth negotiations involving gongs.

In turn, we now investigate to what extent the numeral systems in AP languages have been influenced by nearby Austronesian languages. In sections 4-6, we saw that some AP languages employ numerals containing morphemes that have been borrowed from Austronesian languages, in the following five contexts:

1. A reflex of pAN *pitu was borrowed into the Straits-West Alor languages as a base in the numeral 'seven'.

2. The Western Pantar numeral 'six' hisnakkung has an initial element histhat is a likely Austronesian borrowing (< PAN esa*isa 'one'), and hisnakkung represents a partial calque of the [5 1] pattern found in Austronesian languages of Flores.

3. An additive operator with the approximate form /geresin/ was borrowed into east Alor languages from Tokodede (north Timor).

4. Reflex(es) of pAN *Ratus 'hundred' were borrowed from the Flores-Lembata Austronesian languages into the languages of Pantar, and to a lesser extent Alor.

5. Reflex(es) of pAN *libu 'thousand' were borrowed from Flores-Lembata Austronesian languages into AP languages across the board.

The pattern for Kui tadusa 'eight' seems to be formed a multiplicative pattern 2x4 due to the second element appearing to be derived from usa 'four'. This multiplicative pattern is otherwise unknown in AP languages, but is found in the Austronesian languages of central-eastern Flores (Ende, Lio, Ngadha, Rongga, Keo). Whilst the Kui are today not directly adjacent to any of the Austronesian languages of Flores with multiplicative 'eight', there are indications that they may have had fairly intensive contact with Austronesian speakers from the west. Kui oral tradition holds that the royal family of the group migrated to Alor from Flores (Emilie Wellfelt pers. comm.

Finally, recall that forming 'nine' by subtraction ([10]-1) is found in the AP languages of Straits-West-Alor, while in the Austronesian languages of central-east Flores, monomorphemic 'nine' (proto-Austronesian *siwa) has been replaced with a subtractive compound containing two formatives: a reflex of proto-Austronesian *esa 'one', and an unanalysable initial element (*tar). There is no obvious explanation how the subtractive 'nine' entered this group of Flores languages. Neither can we explain the origin of the subtractive pattern in proto-Straits-West-Alor. We have argued that in this proto-language, subtractive 'nine' replaced the original pAP base-five form of 'nine', and involved reflexes of pAP *nuk 'one', subsequently extending the subtractive system to 'eight' and 'seven'. So it is the subtractive pattern that is similar across the Flores and Straits-West Alor groups, not the lexemes themselves. The geographical closeness of the groups, combined with the relative rarity of subtractive systems in both Austronesian and Alor-Pantar languages, may be suggestive of a (possibly ancient) structural diffusion. On the other hand, we cannot exclude the possibility that the forms were innovated independently in both groups: aspoint out, innovation of subtractive numerals has occured independently in proto-Malay, central Maluku and south-east Sulawesi.

In short, contact-induced borrowings of both forms and structures ('matter' and 'patterns') have played a role in shaping some of the numerals in the AlorPantar and nearby Austronesian languages. Some contacts took place in historical times, and are supported by historical and ethnographic data, others are likely to be of more ancient date and must remain hypothetical. There are also similarities that cannot be traced back to contact.

8 Conclusions and discussion

From this comparative study of the numeral paradigms in 19 AP language varieties we draw three types of conclusions: (i) about the morphological make up of the numeral compounds; (ii) about typological rarities in the AP numeral systems, and (iii) about the subgrouping and history of the AP language group.