The plural words all code plurality, but in all five languages they have additional connotations, such as expressing a sense of completeness or abundance. A plural word may also function to impose an individuated reading of a referent, or to pick out a part or group of referents from a larger set. Plural words are used to express plural vocatives. None of the additional senses and functions of the plural words is shared across all of the five languages.

What our study shows is that, even amongst five typologically similar and genetically closely related languages whose ancestor had a plural word, the original plural word has drifted in different syntactic directions and developed additional semantic dimensions, showing a degree of variation that is higher than any other inherited word.

Participant marking: Corpus study and video elicitation

Sebastian Fedden

Dunstan Brown

The Alor-Pantar languages are particularly interesting for examining the relative importance of referential properties as opposed to lexical stipulation in determining pronominal marking on the verb. In this chapter we take a detailed look at the patterns of pronominal marking on verbs in the existing corpora of three languages, Abui, Kamang and Teiwa. These differ in relation to the importance of these factors. There is a continuum with event properties, such as volitionality and affectedness at one end, and stipulation or arbitrary association of prefixes with verbs at the other end. Abui is located at one end of this continuum, because event semantics play a major role. Teiwa is located at the other end, with the lexical property of object animacy as the major determinant of prefixal marking. Between these two extremes we find Kamang. We also argue that lexical properties such as animacy, as opposed to event properties, create the means for arbitrary classes to develop. We complement the corpus study with data from video experimentation using 42 specially prepared video stimuli, in which we systematically varied animacy and volitionality values for participants in one and two-participant events.

1 Introduction

The Alor-Pantar languages sometimes index event participants using pronominal indexing on the verb. The factors that determine when this happens vary significantly across the languages. For some, referential properties dependent on the semantics of the event (e.g., volitionality and affectedness) play a major role, while for others it appears that the indexing is lexically determined by the verb.

In order to illustrate the range of possibilities, we concentrate on three languages: Teiwa, Kamang and Abui. For a map, see the introduction to this volume. These three languages have been chosen as they constitute three representative types in the micro-typology of the Alor-Pantar languages.

Our main source of data are the respective corpora of Teiwa (Klamer, Teiwa corpus), Kamang (Schapper, Kamang corpus) and Abui (Kratochvíl, Abui corpus). In additon we use the following sources: Teiwa (Pantar; Klamer (2010a); Klamer, fieldnotes; Robinson, fieldnotes), Kamang (Eastern Alor,; Schapper, fieldnotes) and Abui (Central-Western Alor;; Kratochvíl, fieldnotes; Schapper, fieldnotes).

An important source of data are 42 specially designed videos created to represent events varying with respect to specific semantic variables (participant number, animacy, volitionality) (see). For Abui and Teiwa we present the data for the associated video elicitation experiments. For Kamang our video data show that prefixation occurs very often, although less so than for Abui. In order to understand Kamang's place in the typology, with its set of obligatorily prefixed verbs that must be conventionally associated with a particular prefix type, rather than this being determined by semantic values, we present data from the sources listed above.

We focus especially on the difference between properties expressing a relationship between participants and events, namely affectedness in Abui and Kamang and volitionality in Abui, on the one hand, and the lexical properties of words (animacy, verb classes) in Teiwa, on the other hand. We find that Abui, Kamang and Teiwa are located at different points on a continuum of lexical stipulation: Abui is at one end, where event semantics play the greatest role, and Teiwa is at the other end, where lexical properties play the greatest role, with Kamang located somewhere between these two extremes.

The languages under investigation can be contrasted along further dimensions: alignment type and number of prefix series. Abui and Kamang have semantic alignment, Abui being more fluid in its alignment than Kamang, as we will see in the course of this chapter. Teiwa, on the other hand, has accusative syntactic alignment. Finally, the Alor languages Abui and Kamang have multiple prefix series, five and six, respectively, while the Pantar language Teiwa has only one.

It is important to bear in mind that we are not dealing with morphological case in the Alor-Pantar languages but with indexing on the verb. In this chapter we use the term 'pronominal indexing' to describe a structure where there is a pronominal affix on the verb 1 and a co-referent noun phrase or free pronounIn the Alor-Pantar languages pronominal indices are exclusively prefixal.

10 Participant marking: Corpus study and video elicitation optionally (indicated by brackets) in the same clause, as in (1). Co-reference is indicated by the index k. There is no pronominal indexing in