It gives, as Hansen writes, through 'interconnectedness of characteristics and perspectives on quality of life' summed up by Medby as the 'quality of being Arctic' which she then further interrogates. It takes through Naess' expostulation of 'exotification' and through Tilling and colleagues' concern about the scientification of the Arctic, which can never quite capture the connection they seek in their scientific work.

How do we avoid the Arctic being simply, in Duda's words, 'featured in outsiders' collective constructs', territorialised as per the chapter by French and colleagues, or commodified as detailed by Wilson and colleagues? Why do we even wish to avoid these phenomena? Ultimately, as with any concept or idea, it is what is made of it, to be used, abused and misused as those with power choose. Arcticness lends itself to adages applied to so many other phenomena and processes, as ephemeral and operational, as theoretical and grounded, as entrenched and severed. Reminiscent of democracy, Arcticness could be the region's worst descriptor-apart from all the others. Pilfering from participatory development discourse, the act of labelling with and as Arcticness could be an imposed tyranny. McCauley and colleagues propose Arcticness as a process rather than as a product-exactly as was done with postdisaster shelter two generations previously.

Arcticness is thus made to have traction and relevance beyond the Arctic, often by those seeking to appropriate and misappropriate the Arctic for their own purposes. The starkest example is the polar bear being conscripted to symbolise Arctic change, neglecting the peoples, livelihoods and communities who are affected by change far more than polar bears. Ice, snow and cold are important Arctic symbols, but not for their own sake-instead, for the peoples' Arcticness, epitomised in Sheila Watt-Cloutier's powerful statement about 'The Right to be Cold'.

This power and voice from the north, defining themselves by themselves, is perhaps the key of and for Arcticness: how the Arctic is lived and experienced by peoples and communities along with the qualities therein. The chapters in this book are experiential, beyond memory, meaning that by definition much is missing and much is disputable, because people experience and articulate differently.

Here, perhaps, lies the meaning of Arcticness beyond the Arctic: to take control of one's own descriptors and explanations of oneself, to create and express power and voice by one's own definitions of oneself, and to grasp and tackle the challenge of others setting the agenda for oneself-all happening inside and outside one's own community. Opinions will differ. It can and should source strength rather than battle.

The same has been witnessed for islandness, ethnicness and engineeringness among many other-ness-es. These reflections seek identities, qualities, groupings, connections and boundedness. The Arctic is no different, including with respect to the tumultuous environmental and social changes of contemporary times-and reaching back through millennia. Arcticness might seem to cleave by setting the Arctic apart, but in distinguishing what is or could be Arctic from what is not, a form of 'Arctic without borders'-borders across time and space-is sculpted.

Connections among indigenous peoples, natural resource-based communities, cold weather locations, mining towns and ocean-based livelihoods have all contributed to Arcticness. In otherising what is not Arctic, bonds are forged through identifying differences which by definition delineate what are not differences. This inevitably bounces back to those being otherised who must similarly describe themselves partly through what they are and partly through what they are not.

Arcticness thus teaches how to define and accept one's own-ness as distinct and partitioned from others, yet also with similarities and boundary crossings. It is not even about iconising. Instead, it is about taking the power and creating the voice in, for and of the Arctic which for too long has resided outside the northern latitudes-to a large extent revealing an 'Arctic of the oppressed'.

It is about creating an Arctic home for those living in this ever-changing home.

Whether or not 'Arcticness' is the most powerful and voiceful term remains to be seen. However it is labelled, and preferably with transferability across Arctic languages and cultures, Arctic experiences and qualities resonate far beyond the location and, from the authors writing here, it proffers knowledges, wisdoms and actions to the world for addressing today's global challenges and opportunities.

Within Arcticness, outside the Arctic

vladimir vasiliev

What is the Arctic and what is Arcticness for a person living in the largest Arctic region of the world, not living in the Arctic zone itself, but much more southwards, and still considering himself to be an Arctic resident?

I am a native Sakha. I was born and raised in Central Yakutia, in taiga area. I first saw tundra and the Arctic Ocean being an adult 27-yearold postgraduate student at the Yakutsk Scientific Center of the Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences. At the same time, from an early age, I was absorbed by the stories about brave polar explorers in an effort to understand what attracted people to such a harsh land, why, from olden times, they have so wilfully struggled through snow and cold into this, at first sight, deserted country, knowing that they may not come back.