In the UK (especially among non-governmental organisations or NGOs), the master frame has been termed as 'just sustainability' 53 despite the earlier observation that there exist 'at least three different constructions of environmental justice'. 54 This refers to a frame that links together issues of sustainability, social inclusion and procedural equity.

Dawson demonstrates, however, the potential fluidity of the energy justice master frame in linking it explicitly to eco-nationalism.She identifies sub-group identity, social justice and environmentalism as the core tenets of the US energy justice frame. The US environmental movement is, in her view, built on the foundation of sub-group identity and the desire for social justice. As a result, groups defined by religion, gender, national identity or class could offer a basis for energy justice movements and their master frame. In this way, the energy justice frame covers, for example, the protection of indigenous peoples across the Americas 56 or Taiwan 57 or tribal groups facing environmental hazards in Africa.In such a conception, the energy justice frame can actually be ultimately divisive and exacerbate violent conflict. Dawson traces the environmentalist roots of nationalist movements in the former USSR which lead directly to social tensions and fragmentation. She observes, 'the intertwining of environmental causes and sub-group identities can be seen to both enhance environmental mobilisation among previously unmobilised groups and deepen a pre-existing sentiment of "us" versus "them" within the population'.Empirical conceptions of justice are, therefore, as problematic as theoretical and conceptual incarnations. Pellow and Brulle argue, indeed, that '(s)cholars cannot understand  environmental injustices through a singularly focused framework that emphasises one form of inequality to the exclusion of others'. 60 Our attention should be drawn to where and when injustice is felt and experienced. Hobson argues that energy justice research must diversify its understanding of where injustice can be found. In her assessment of an environmental organisation in Singapore, she demonstrates how environmental injustice is felt in everyday practices of individuals and organisations, even where expressions of public concern on the environment are infrequent or at least highly managed.More recently, substantial research has focused our attention on injustices within climate activism.The fluidity of master frames on energy justice offers one potential solution to unbinding how we approach justice and injustice. We should turn our attention to unlocking further how we can explore master frames of injustice through a better understanding of Arcticness framing.

Understanding

Introduction

When exploring what is meant by 'Arcticness' it becomes pertinent to ask what is unique about the Arctic as a 'resource frontier'. The Arctic has found itself receiving greater international attention in recent years, 1 this attention commonly attributed to pronounced sea ice loss from rapid climate change 2 and the subsequent increased accessibility to the region's abundant natural resources.While excitable claims of a region opening up and a resource rush are arguably hyperbolic, 4 nevertheless it is clear the presence of extractive industries will continue to grow in the coming decades, be it offshore petroleum in the Pechora Sea, 5 diamonds in Nunavut,or rare-earth minerals mining in Southern Greenland.Resource frontier narratives represent a specific set of ideas and interests and can be conceptualised as relational spaces where economy, nature and society co-construct. 8 Typically host governments, international financial institutions and the private sector use this rhetoric to legitimise foreign direct investment, natural resource extraction and commodity production.To investors, the term 'frontier' denotes higher levels of risk but also the possibility of significant rewards. These socalled frontiers are typically located in remote regions lacking strong forms of state governance. The potential exists for higher levels of political, social, technical and environmental risk from resource extraction.When exploration begins and the first commercially viable energy or non-energy minerals are discovered, the idea of resource wealth leads to multiple imaginaries. On the one hand, the resource curse narrative demonstrates the links between natural resource wealth and weak development outcomes.On the other hand, the resource-led development narrative highlights how new-found petroleum resources may catalyse national development towards middle-or high-income country status.It is assumed that if social and environmental issues are well managed then the extractive industries can contribute to sustainable development and poverty reduction. Indeed, the resource curse narrative has been reframed as a 'governance issue' and a political-institutional challenge, as opposed to a quasi-automatic phenomenon that resource-rich countries are destined to follow.Predicted environmental transformation and transition towards a resource frontier presents significant challenges for the Arcticas it does for other regions around the world. Here, a comparison with another region experiencing the rhetoric of extractives-led growth proves useful. Significant reserves of oil and gas have been discovered in East Africa in the last decade, prompting governments in the region to model pathways towards middle-income status with significant emphasis on resource-led development. Where the overriding political economic context in the Arctic and East Africa is that of extractives-led growth, it becomes pertinent to explore the similarities and differences between these emerging resource frontiers.

This chapter compares and contrasts developments in the Arctic and East Africa by examining key material, global interest, governance and community themes associated with increased oil exploration in Greenland and Uganda. Both contexts are considered to be at the 'frontier' of extraction given their 'unconventional' locations.