I can confirm the words of all people who fall in love with the Arctic at first sight, that it enchants and keeps attracting you. Vast expanses, bright colours of tundra in summer, white land melting into the sky in winter, incredible glows of the northern lights, reindeer herds of many thousands, somewhat unreal and the absolutely ancient life of indigenous people in the reindeer-skin tents which seem to take you back thousands of years. Even the presence of some evidence of modern life such as newspapers, books, walkie-talkies and televisions do not hamper perceiving the Arctic as a separate ancient world, as another civilisation.

At the same time, the Russian Arctic has had its periods of prosperity. In Soviet times, the Northern Sea Route functioned at full capacity and large-scale industrial projects of tin and gold mining were launched in the Yakut Arctic. The Arctic regions had much better supplies of all kinds of commodities than those in Central Yakutia. The young willingly went to work in the remote settlements, being confident that everything necessary would be provided for proper work in the Arctic.

The situation changed dramatically after the collapse of the Soviet Union. The development of the Arctic territories almost stopped. Only a few ships passed along the Northern Sea Route in summer, many settlements were closed, people were leaving, and the only ones to stay were the indigenous people and those who did not see themselves living in other regions of the country, whose hearts had been chained by this harsh land.

Almost a half of Yakutia was in a very difficult situation. Immense distances and lack of funds in budgets did not allow the solving of all the problems at once, but the leaders of Yakutia have always paid great attention to the development of the Arctic zone. It was obvious from the very beginning that a single region was not able to tackle all the problems, and the first President of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia), Mikhail Nikolaev, actively established connections not only with Russian regions, but also with the foreign ones, in order to attract global attention to the development of the Arctic as a whole. For this purpose, he initiated the republic's joining the Northern Forum international organisation and supported the establishment of the University of the Arctic and other international structures.

Being a biologist, I wanted to make a contribution to environmental protection in the Arctic. It is now pleasant to remember that I was among the initiators and coordinators of the Integrated Arctic Expedition of the Yakutsk Scientific Center of the Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences in the 1990s. Within the frameworks of the expedition, we were able to collect a considerable amount of data and information on not only biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, but also on subsurface use, the status of indigenous peoples, traditional economies, the preservation of languages and culture. I hope that these materials were helpful in developing the republic's new legislation and development programmes of different regions.

The experience I have received within the framework of the Arctic expedition still helps me. With my colleagues from not only Yakutia, but also from Russia and abroad, we have implemented a whole range of projects on environmental protection in the Arctic, support for indigenous peoples and climate change, involving the capacities of the Arctic Council, Northern Forum, UNEP, UNDP, WWF, Snowchange and other recognised international organisations. I believe that I have every reason to consider myself a resident and patriot of the Arctic, as I have devoted more than 30 years of my life to studying it and attracting support in different areas.

My family is also closely connected to the Arctic. My wife, Maria Krivtsova, helps me in implementing all projects, not only as an interpreter, but also as a coordinator. She is Russian born in Yakutsk but she is engaged in many international activities dedicated to the Arctic. Even our five-year-old daughter Sofia, although she has not been to the Arctic yet, has her own small reindeer herd of four reindeer-on the day she was born, Turvaurgin Chukchi community gave her a female reindeer. We have become good friends with the members of this and other communities of the Lower Kolyma, as well as with the College of Northern Peoples. Through them, we continue our strong ties with the Arctic.

At present, being a member of the Government of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia), I have many more opportunities for direct participation in the development of the Yakut Arctic, and I intend to do my best to change the life in the Arctic for the better. In Yakutia, 2014 was announced as the Year of the Arctic through the initiative of the Head of our Republic, Egor Borsiov. Such endeavours allow focusing on a specific topic, to evaluate the situation, to conduct high-quality analyses and to provide an integrated approach involving all available agencies. The Year of the Arctic resulted in the development of the Integrated Arctic Territories Development Program and the establishment of the State Committee for the Arctic Issues.

Today, life in the Arctic regions is changing rapidly. New community facilities-schools, kindergartens, hospitals, cultural and sports centres-are commissioned. Large-scale work on developing industry, attracting investments and improving the entire energy supply system is conducted. In 2015, the most powerful (1 MW) solar power plant above the Arctic Circle was constructed in Batagai settlement of Verkhoyansk region. Constructing a wind plant of the same capacity is planned in Tiksi. The population of the Arctic regions is growing slowly but steadily.