Radar observation methods

Radar-an acronym for Radio Detection and Ranging-functions by transmitting and receiving pulses of radio waves to investigate the location and properties of a target. The distance from the radar instrument to a target can be determined by measuring the round-trip delay of a radar pulse-a simple concept that originated from the classical experiments conducted by James Clerk Maxwell (1865) and Heinrich Hertz (1886), reflecting a 455MHz wave off metallic objects from a distance. However, it is inappropriate to ascribe the invention of radar technology to a specific incident or date, but instead through over a century of developments and refinements of radio technology, and aided by key geopolitical events during the mid-twentieth century.Although the concept of radar is overwhelmingly associated with World War II, the prominence of ionospheric research before and after the war, as well as the Space Race behind the scenes of the Cold War cannot be ignored.Initially using radar to measure the height of the ionosphere, this scientific technique was then adapted by Sir Robertto detect aircraft at a distance, along with other radiolocation methods developed by other countries under the cloak of military secrecy. The conclusion of World War II saw the dawn of radar for non-military use, with notable developments in civil aviation, meteorology, astronomy and geology.One of the earliest radar instruments used in the Polar Regions was ground-based ice penetrating radar, to investigate Antarctic ice shelves in the 1960s.Since then, the interest in radar turned towards airborne and then satellite platforms to give a wider view of the ice. The characteristics of the radar waveform used vary depending on its application. High power short pulsed waveforms are very commonly used while, more recently, low power swept-frequency waveforms (pervasive within the automotive radar community) are popular particularly within research in academia due to their low cost and ease of implementation. Often, the primary goal of many radar surveys on or above ice is to measure ice thickness, which is an important component in models of ice dynamics, ocean circulation, global heat budgets and sea-level rise. However, ground-based radars can also investigate certain qualities within ice, such as changes in crystal structure, internal layering and water content.The following section describes how different radar instruments can be used, with examples relevant in the Arctic. Principally, radar is used in two different ways to study the properties and characteristics of snow and ice. The first is to obtain data on the changes of one area through time. The second is to obtain an 'image' of an area to be considered.

satellite radar

Radar instruments on board satellites can be used to observe the changing Arctic ice cover, using satellite radar altimetry. Altimetry is a technique in which the height of an instrument is measured above a target surface. In satellite radar altimetry the distance is measured from the satellite to the Earth's surface. The Earth's surface elevation can then be calculated by combining the distance measurement with precise knowledge of the satellite's orbit. In the Arctic, satellite radar altimetry has been used to measure the elevation of land ice,and sea ice.Applications of the data include estimating the mass of ice sheets,ocean circulationand sea ice thickness and volume.Sea ice covers about 12 per cent of the world's oceans. Because of its salt content, ocean water begins to freeze when it reaches a temperature around-1.8°C. Sea ice is a major element of the Earth's climate system. It regulates atmospheric temperature by reflecting the sun's energy and by forming an insulating layer between the ocean and the atmosphere. This insulating layer slows heat exchange from the relatively warm ocean to the cool atmosphere. The growth and melt of sea ice also affects freshwater input into the world's oceans. As sea ice grows, salt is expelled in a process known as brine rejection and as sea ice melts, relatively fresh water is released to the ocean. In the northern hemisphere, Arctic sea ice regulates the freshwater input into the Arctic Ocean and the subpolar North Atlantic. The Arctic temperature and freshwater balance affect patterns of atmospheric and oceanic circulation across the region and at lower latitudes. These in turn could impact on the climate in Europe, America and across the northern hemisphere through, for example, changes in rainfallor an increase in extreme weather events such as drought and flooding.To fully understand the global impacts of changes in the Arctic sea ice cover, long-term and accurate observations of the entire ice pack are required. It is now possible to measure the thickness and volume of sea ice across the Arctic by using satellite radar altimetry.

In 2010 the European Space Agency (ESA) launched the Cryo Sat-2 satellite.CryoSat-2 was, and still is, the only radar

altimeter satellite to cover close to the entire northern hemisphere. It provides unparalleled coverage of the Arctic Ocean with an orbit that extends to 88°N. The resolution of the CryoSat-2 radar allows it to measure the elevation of Arctic sea ice, and the elevation of the open water in the cracks between sea ice