In doing so, it aims to better understand the characteristics associated with regions undergoing extractive-led growth imaginaries as well as unpacking location-specific idiosyncrasies such as 'Arcticness'.

Greenland is the world's largest island (2,150,000 km 2 ) with the vast majority of this territory comprised of 80 per cent ice cover.With a population of 58,000, it is also one of the least-densely populated territories in the world with 15,000 of its population found in the capital Nuuk to the south-west of the country. A Danish colony for over 200 years) with a demographic that is 90 per cent Inuit and 10 per cent 'European', in 1979 was granted 'autonomous rule' within the Kingdom of Denmark, and has since been progressing towards complete independence; 17 what has been described as a process of decolonisation.If this happens, Greenland would become the first Inuit nation state.Further autonomy was granted to Greenland in 2008 under the status of 'Self-Rule' which significantly gave the country control over its vast natural resource reserves 20 which include gold, diamonds, iron ore, cryolite, lead, zinc, molybdenum, oil, natural gas, uranium and other rare-earth minerals.Uranium reserves are considerable near the site of Kvanefjeld with some predicting Greenland could potentially overtake China as the world's largest exporter of the mineral.While some extractive activity has previously occurred in Greenland, no such activity has taken place in recent decades.Uganda is a relatively small landlocked country (238,000 km 2 ) in East Africa. It has a diverse landscape with mountains and lakes ringing a plateau. The country is generally tropical (although semi-arid in the north-east) with two dry seasons punctuating rainy weather. It is a densely populated country with a population of over 37 million. As a presidential republic, Uganda is a sovereign state that became independent from the UK in 1962. However, the country was besieged with conflict under dictatorial regimes until President Museveni's regime, which began in 1986, brought relative peace, stability and economic growth to the country. Although a leader in implementing neoliberal reforms in the 1990s, which paved the way for an era of economic growth and positive donor relations, government-donor relations have deteriorated over the last decade with the government hampered by allegations of widespread corruption.While poverty has declined in Uganda from 56.4 per cent to 19.5 per cent between 1992 and 2012, 25 it still remains very low on the Human Development Index (163rd out of 188 in 2016). Agriculture is Uganda's most important sector and employs over a third of the workforce, with coffee, tea, cotton and fish accounting for the bulk of export revenues.Uganda's key resources include copper, cobalt, hydropower, limestone, salt, phosphate and now oil.However, given relatively small deposits, the extraction of minerals has been a very small proportion of export revenues in the past.

Materiality

Within this chapter, materiality is concerned with oil's physical and economic properties, as well as the social-technical and environmental implications of oil extraction in resource frontiers. In Greenland, hydrocarbons have largely been explored offshore in the Disko Bay area, whereas in Uganda this process is being undertaken onshore in the remote Albertine Graben region of Western Uganda. Both regions are remote, difficult to access and pose socio-technical and environmental challenges. However geography matters, there are a number of 'development traps' that hinder income growth in poor countries.One of those 'traps' is being landlocked with poor infrastructure connections to the sea through neighbouring countries, as is the case with Uganda. Greenland, on the other hand, is well-positioned to develop and exploit its resources through seaborne trade. Nevertheless, the risks are significant. In Disko Bay the environmental risks of oil extraction include sea ice, extreme cold and harsh weather. In both areas oil extraction may disrupt local livelihoods, wildlife and tourism given the extensive infrastructure that needs to be built in and around villages, towns and national parks.

Both contexts lack oil infrastructure. Oil reserves in Uganda are extremely remote and isolated from markets, as they are in Greenland. However, the type of infrastructure needed to extract the onshore oil in Uganda is significantly different from Greenland's offshore oil. A 1400 km oil export pipeline is currently being scoped from Uganda to the Indian Ocean via Tanzania, as is a small oil refinery in Uganda for domestic and regional consumption. In Greenland, considerable infrastructure developments to areas such as port and onshore support facilities are required to make oil production and exportation a reality.Furthermore, there are questions surrounding the efficacy and reliability of current oil drilling technology and its ability to withstand extreme polar conditions.Commercial viability is also an important material attribute of these frontiers. In Greenlandic waters the quantities are estimated as vast (although no commercially viable wells have been drilled yet), with nearly a fifth of undiscovered oil resources in the Arctic region located in two Greenlandic provinces: East Greenland Rift Basins and West Greenland-East Canada.