The first international environmental treaty that was concluded was indeed based on the overexploitation of seals in the Bering Sea. Throughout the late nineteenth century, American, British/ Canadian, Japanese and Russian vessels significantly overharvested northern fur seals (Callorhinus ursinus). With the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867, the seal-rich Pribliof Islands became part of the United States, which required licences for the hunting of seals in American waters. In the early 1890s, it seized two British/ Canadian vessels which were conducting the extremely wasteful pelagic seal hunt without a licence. The case was brought before the Tribunal of Arbitration in Paris. In 1893, the first bilateral treaty relevant for the Arctic was concluded with the Arbitration Treaty, 3 which established a ban on pelagic whaling and set clear rules for the conduct of seal hunting. Most notably, for the purposes of this chapter, the first reflection of the Arctic as a cultural space occurred in this treaty, the narratives of which, by and large, remain until today: Article 8 establishes an exemption for the native people of the region who are not bound to the provisions of the Arbitration Treaty. This, however, is only the case if they conduct the seal hunt in a traditional manner, using traditional equipment and without any commercial intent.The Arbitration Treaty therefore establishes the first legal definition of 'subsistence hunting' and the conditions for exempting indigenous peoples from any bans on or restrictions to commercial hunting of marine mammals. The provisions of the Arbitration Treaty concerning Arctic peoples and cultures were also mirrored in the Convention between the United States, Great Britain, Russia and Japan for the Preservation and Protection of Fur Seals of 7 July 1911 (Fur Seals Convention). The Fur Seals Convention was concluded due to the continuous decline of the northern fur seal populations, primarily because of ongoing hunts by Japanese and Russian vessels. Article IV of the convention reads:

It is further agreed that the provisions of this Convention shall not apply to Indians, Ainos, Aleuts, or other aborigines dwelling on the coast of the waters mentioned in Article I, who carry on pelagic sealing in canoes not transported by or used in connection with other vessels, and propelled entirely by oars, paddles, or sails, and manned by not more than five persons each, in the way hitherto practiced and without the use of firearms; provided that such aborigines are not in the employment of other persons or under contract to deliver the skins to any person.

The regime collapsed during World War II, being succeeded by the 1957 Interim Convention on Conservation of North Pacific Fur Seals. Article VII of the interim convention once again almost verbatim reiterates the provisions of its predecessor and exempts 'Indians, Ainos, Aleuts, or Eskimos' from the convention's provisions, provided they are not in the employment of commercial enterprises and conduct the seal hunts with non-modern equipment. Up until 1985, when the fur seal regime collapsed,Arctic indigenous peoples were not entitled to technological development when conducting seal hunting in the Bering Sea, but were forced to apply techniques and utilise technology even though safer and more humane practices and technologies were available.

In a similar manner, although not exclusively limited to indigenous peoples in the Arctic, the international regime regulating whale hunting has incorporated exemptions for indigenous peoples. In particular, the whale hunts in Alaska and Greenland played crucial roles in inserting the category of 'Aboriginal Subsistence Whaling' into the work of the International Whaling Commission in 1981.From the first emergence of a whaling regime in 1931, aboriginal people were excluded from any regulatory means. As with the Fur Seal Regime, this exemption only applies when the hunters do not employ modern technology and are not part of a commercial enterprise. Both the 1931 Regulation of Whaling and the 1937 International Agreement on Whaling underline this approach. The 1946 International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling (ICRW) has, however, stepped away from blocking aboriginal peoples from utilising modern technology. Instead, the narrative of 'subsistence need' has been inserted. While this concept in its inchoate form in the whaling context merely referred to local consumption of gray and right whales by indigenous peoples, over time the concept has evolved. 'Subsistence needs' are not to endanger the population status of a species while they are required to correspond to the nutritional and cultural requirements of the respective indigenous people. In order to determine whether quotas for indigenous peoples are set, 7 national governments are to provide the IWC with a 'Needs statement', which 'details the cultural, subsistence and nutritional aspects of the hunt, products and distribution'.The reflection of narratives that were applied more than 100 years ago in legal regimes affecting Arctic residents are still relevant. The most prominent example is the EU regime banning the trade in seal products that was adopted in September 2009.Here, Arctic livelihoods relating to the hunting of seals are clearly narrated and, throughout the preparatory process of the regime, the 'traditionality' of seal hunts-meaning the long-standing history of seal hunting and processing by indigenous peoples-stands at the fore. The Seal Regime's overall purpose is shady, but it functionally bans all trade in seal products in the European Union with the exemption of those stemming from indigenous peoples. This so-called 'indigenous exemption' is, as can be seen above, a common feature in regimes managing-or banning-the utilisation of marine living resources. In the wake of the challenge of the regime before the World Trade Organization (WTO) by Canada and Norway, the EU was forced to amend the regime in order to make it fully compliant with international trade law and its moral exception under GATT Article XX (a).