Projections from the IPCC and ACIA suggest a surface air temperature rise of 2.5-7°C by the end of the century; significant changes to the Arctic biome's biodiversity and ecosystems;and a substantial retreat of the summer sea ice extent. Furthermore, these changes have significant global ramifications, with a sea-level rise and alterations to global oceanic circulations from the effect of lower surface albedo and increased freshwater run-off from glaciers and/ or ice sheet retreat.The rate at which the Greenland Ice Sheet recedes is particularly important with regards to global sea-level rise.It is in this context that Greenlandic oil development finds itself positioned. That there is a commonly held belief that the potential for oil development in Greenland is a direct consequence of increased accessibility from a warming environment reinforces the association with climate change. As such, Greenland's location in the Arctic, at the frontline of climate change, ensures that the discourse around Greenland oil becomes entwined with the wider global climate change discourse.The African context is significantly different. The exploration and production of oil is not dependent upon a changing climate, but sub-Saharan Africa is acknowledged to be among the regions which are most vulnerable to climate change.The East African region, in particular, has a high dependence on rain fed agriculture, biomass and rivers for energy, and increasing vulnerability given the higher frequency of extreme weather events such as droughts and floods.One of the hardest hit sectors has been energy given the region's reliance on hydroelectric power. 51 While 80 per cent of Uganda's energy supply comes from large hydro, increasing industrial demand and potential delays to large hydro projects may necessitate the recommissioning of heavy fuel oil power plants to fill predicted energy shortfalls. 52 There is significant inequity in energy access as 85-90 per cent of the country's population has no access to electricity. A significant 90 per cent of the people in Uganda live in rural areas and use biomass (wood and charcoal) as primary energy sources. 53 While a changing climate is significant for both Greenland and Uganda, the narratives of oil exploration, climate change and global commons are tightly interwoven within the context of Arcticness.

As highlighted above, there is significant global interest in how to govern resource extraction in frontier contexts. Governance in this case can be defined as the hard and soft rules that shape and constrain oil exploration and development.The governance of a resource frontier is characterised by a myriad of actors and ideas. International NGOs, donors, multi-national oil companies, and international finance institutions among others vie for policy space to have their ideas and interests taken up and implemented by host governments and exploration companies. Often international norms on transparency, stakeholder engagement, environmental protection and social welfare are advocated given a lack of state capacity in these remote regions.

At a Greenlandic national level, the Minerals Resources Act of 2009 is the guiding legalisation surrounding oil development.The growth in interest in Greenland's oil reserves and the willingness of successive Greenlandic governments to develop this sector has led to governance changes at a national level. Most notably, after pressure from domestic and international civil society, the Bureau of Minerals and Petroleum, which once had responsibility for every aspect of oil development including environmental matters, has seen many of its responsibilities move to new organisations, such as the Environmental Agency for the Mineral Resources Area.Positioned within the Kingdom of Denmark, Greenland governance structures around offshore oil are complex.Furthermore, Greenland is positioned within a modern narrative of Arcticness: 'as an apolitical space of regional governance, functional co-operation, and peaceful co-existence'.The Arctic as a global commons provides the basis for a spirit of collaboration and cooperation that is somewhat unique and distinct from other regions of the world. This spirit is embodied by the Arctic Council, a non-regulatory, soft-law intergovernmental forum comprised of the eight Arctic states, indigenous groups in the form of 'permanent participants' and 'observers' that include non-Arctic states and other interested stakeholder groups. The council is continually evolving from its original narrow environmental focus and while changes have not been particularly revolutionary, they are nevertheless significant enough to suggest an attempt at adaption to regional change. It is in recent years that governance initiatives around offshore oil development have shown hints of a future Arctic Council transforming into a decision-making body, such as the binding 'Agreement on Cooperation on Marine Oil Pollution, Preparedness and Response in the Arctic'. 59 If such evolution continues, Arctic regional governance could potentially have a greater impact on Greenland's decisions around oil; the contemporary geopolitics of Arcticness influencing its governance arrangements. 60 However, at present, many argue that agreements like the council's oil spill response are weak and require little from the Arctic states who have signed it.There are also norms for greater continental integration and cooperation for development in Africa. The African Union was established in 2001 and consists of 54 member countries. It is headquartered in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and made up of both administrative and political bodies. Utilising the extractive industries for sustainable growth is a strong norm in Africa, underpinned by the African Union's 'Agenda 2063' as well as the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) and the African Mining Vision, among other African Union entities and documents.