and efforts of companies to profile their technical, financial and socially oriented capacities. Eventually Statoil and Total joined a consortium with Gazprom called the Shtokman Development AG in 2008. However, exploration never got off the ground, with the 'shale revolution' in the USA driving gas prices down in what had been a target market for liquefied natural gas from the Shtokman field.Great expectations

The interview findings were illustrative of the effects of extractive anticipation in two key regards-negative views on future prospects and changed understandings of potential extractive stakeholders.There are also, potentially, a myriad ways in which the Shtokman development may have had lasting impacts on the region outside of the ones identified via the interview set. Should the case study site have been located in Teriberka on the Murman coast, the impact of actual physical changes in the environment, including advanced infrastructure and changed budgeting or infrastructure planning, may have been more evident. One may also have found more individual decision making directly influenced by the prospect of the project (building choices, business plans, educational decisions and so on). As the case study presented here was focused on tracing the broader regional impacts of the Shtokman project, in particular the expectations and recollections in the regional capital city of Murmansk, the impacts of anticipation remain more cognitive and collective rather than individual or material.

First, there was an impact on how respondents perceived the economic prospects of the region. Some argued that oil and gas had remained entirely 'virtual', yet had still managed to have a negative impact on the region. Local respondents recalled overly optimistic personal spending and borrowing in the course of the build up to the expected project. Interviewees from business, NGOs and the public sector argued that housing prices had become inflated during the days of Shtokman mania, but not matched by employment and salary growth: 'Just say the word Shtokman and apartment prices go up', was a comment that several interviewees made.

Second, respondents' experience with and perceptions of the petroleum companies' corporate social responsibility (CSR) efforts seem to have catalysed change in some understandings among the broader web of stakeholders in the region. In other words, the Shtokman project likely changed perceptions of who can and should play a role in shaping major new extractive projects in the region and we should consider how those new understandings may play a role in future prospects as well.

On the whole, respondents had fairly strong recollections of the social policies and efforts of the international oil companies (e.g. Rosneft, Total and Statoil) that had vied for a position in the Shtokman project. Many interviewees had positive memories of international petroleum companies' advance engagement in the region, such as support for business alliances and NGOs, youth engagement and musical and cultural events.

When it came to the environment and also the capacity of companies to bring sustained long-term benefits to the region, however, several interviewees had developed a more sceptical understanding of 'new' extractive actors (even though their operations never reached the stage where these benefits or risks materialised). Other respondents were uncertain about the actual outcomes of CSR, wondering if it had been just PR or empty words to satisfy company policy. One interviewee from the public sector put it this way: 'We have CSR on paper only. I wish companies understood that they have a responsibility not only to their managers and owners-but to all of us who live here.'

Whether the interviewees had negative, positive or neutral recollections of these concrete CSR practices, for nearly all the interviewees, the memories and current perceptions of the major economic actors that established themselves in the region during the Soviet period were an important conceptual touchstone. These longstanding industrial actors (mining and metallurgy, shipbuilding, nuclear power plants) were held up as the standard against which the social performance of the 'newcomer' petroleum companies (both domestic and international) was judged. Interviewees from all walks of life warmly recited past and present benefits and services provided by the companies to their own employees-entertainment and celebrations, travel, pensioner housing, specialised medical care, education and other family benefits. This renewed appreciation for existing industry can be seen as a lasting imprint of the Shtokman project and may be important in steering regional politics. How will these companies be treated in the future? How hard will they be pressed (or not) by regional government or the public on social and environmental issues as they arise?

In light of experience from the unrealised Shtokman project, the regional authorities interviewed described themselves as limited in holding any large economic actor to account in social and environmental matters. The possibility that companies can 're-register' their tax home to another region was mentioned by three regional government interviewees as causing them to focus on providing 'hospitality', 'maximum comfort' and 'being appealing' for business, rather than pushing for high social and environmental standards. Regional authorities saw their role in relation to oil and gas companies as especially problematic. In the words of one involved regional civil servant:

The development of this sector is carried out by companies of federal significance. Because of this, many of the strategic decisions about them are taken in Moscow. But there is a huge number of tasks that need to be carried out by regional and local levels, we have to create conditions for building of commercial objects, infrastructure, roads  not least the right social conditions. We know the region best and a lot of these tasks can be carried out by us more efficiently and quickly.