Reflections on the Kautokeino case study

Despite support for indigenous rights in Norwegian legislation and institutions, the 'extractivist' economic model promoted by the state is at odds with herders' own vision of the future. Progress in indigenous rights legislation moreover appears to have caused resentment in a mixed community where reindeer herders are perceived to benefit more from government support than non-herding Saami. For those who want the mine, it is seen as a 'saviour' project that will address problems that could be addressed in other ways, although these alternatives are poorly understood as yet. The municipality has much to do over the next four years to resolve some of these internal community issues and ensure that the land users are given adequate representation at the decisionmaking table, while others who feel disempowered or disadvantaged are also allowed the opportunity to have their views incorporated into future planning processes.

Concluding discussion

As Arctic cooperation continues to expand, most recently via the newly established Arctic Economic Council, attention to the limits of shared ideas and practices and the abiding significance of realised and unrealised local developments remains essential. Otherwise, it may be difficult to understand the dispositions, policy trajectories, political processes and expectations that Arctic residents bring to future debates about circumpolar economic and social development. One conclusion we have reached in the course of our research around these case studies is that, as yet, the phenomenon of the unrealised project has been covered very little in academic and policy literature, unlike the notion of 'boom and bust' for instance.

This discussion explores the findings of our case studies from two angles:

 What do our cases tell us about projects that have not happened?

 What do they tell us about Arcticness? What do our cases tell us about unrealised projects?

The case studies presented in this chapter have illustrated some of the ways that extractive industry development (often assumed to be an unstoppable force) is by no means a guaranteed outcome, even where ambitious plans are in place and anticipatory actions well underway. Shtokman remains an unrealised oil and gas 'megaproject' and Greenland's oil and gas industry has yet to get off the ground, while Kautokeino municipality has taken the opportunity to reject a proposed project that could undermine traditional lifestyles. Despite the fact that these projects have not gone ahead, all of the cases demonstrate the extent of local impacts from a development, even before it has actually started-something that is rarely taken into account in the analysis of industrial impacts on local communities.

The case studies have yielded some ideas about the different stakeholders who can influence these processes and their capacities. This influence can happen at different levels, with the tension between 'centre' and 'municipal' levels evident in all cases. In Murmansk, the offshore developments also heightened local expectations about corporate responsibility practices, with long-established industrial entities comparing favourably with the 'newcomers'. The study also revealed the importance of considering how local, international and regional standards and discourses brought in by media, international companies and circumpolar cross-border interactions combine to shape 'unbuilt landscapes' in novel ways.

The cases revealed that local communities are far from homogenous, even if all the local residents are from the same indigenous ethnic group, and the prospect of a new development can open up existing internal 'fault lines' within a community. For example, in Kautokeino, latent resentment about the benefits that reindeer herders receive from the state was intensified when non-herders perceived them as seeking to halt a potential alternative economic option for the community.

While in some cases, such as the Upernavik case, local people are not fired up by the 'hype' of a new project, in other cases, local hopes for profits from the extractive industries can be so intense that they crowd out the potential offered by other socio-economic development paths, as was the case for some residents of Kautokeino. The expectation of extractive industries may result in anticipatory activities such as the Government of Greenland developing and updating its hydrocarbon strategy; or the artificial inflation of the housing market in Murmansk. And yet external forces might suddenly undermine development prospects, leaving communities struggling to revert back to more selfsufficient modes of development.

What do our cases tell us about Arcticness?

Our case studies suggest a number of factors that could point towards an understanding of the notion of 'Arcticness'. Sometimes these are better seen in terms of a cluster of factors that might come together uniquely in the Arctic; sometimes these are striking similarities that can be perceived in different parts of the Arctic, although not in all communities throughout the region. Two of our case studies focus on small indigenous communities in isolated localities practising traditional livelihood activities and, perhaps, this is a dominant picture that many outsiders have of the Arctic. Yet the Murmansk case study highlights the fact that there are also city populations living north of the Arctic Circle. Meanwhile, the Kautokeino case study illustrates the challenges of modernisation in an indigenous community when only half the community practises traditional livelihood activities (subsidised by the state).

Extractive industry development can threaten people's connection to the land-something that deeply defines existence for many Arctic residents, particularly those from indigenous communities. Some people seek to keep their ties to their land and resource-use practices strong. For example, the Upernavik communities hold on to the importance and value of traditional activities, rather than dreaming about the future and the possible benefits that externally-imposed modernisation might bring them. This can be compared to observations of Inuit practices in Alaska, despite 40 years of oil production. It is also comparable to the vision of the reindeer herding community of Kautokeino, whose vision of the future contrasts with the extractivist economic model promoted by the state. Yet half of the Kautokeino community, like others across the Arctic, still sees extractive industries as the easy answer to a multitude of local issues, including youth unemployment, economic stagnation and the maintenance of local infrastructure and public services.