Arctic communities may be disproportionately exposed to the experience of unrealised extractive futures. This is often due to events that local people have had little control over, such as commodity price fluctuations, which may lead companies to withdraw from the Arctic first of all as it is one of the most expensive places to work. Sometimes a project may be halted as a result of local voices making themselves heard in deciding against a development. Yet despite great advances in the understanding and defence of indigenous rights, this is uncommon in the Arctic. Our case studies portray the range of opportunities from mineral resource development, as well as the depth of uncertainty surrounding every development, and the way that decisions, once made, may be thrown up in the air with a turn in commodity prices, or a new municipal election. As such, Arcticness might partially be defined by the regular experience of ambitious, single-industry plans for development, some of which come about and many that do not, but all of which leave their traces.

A key task for companies and policy-makers promoting their visions of the future is to communicate the fundamental uncertainties involved in realising them, and discussing the ways in which anticipation is not the same as prediction or certainty. For researchers and policy analysts, there is a need to explore further the issues surrounding the 'unrealised project', including analysis of project impacts that take place before a project is confirmed (such as anxiety, community tension, unrealistic or heightened expectations, and the 'crowding out' of other future options); the different factors that may result in a project not being pursued, including issues ranging from commodity price fluctuations to the different ways that communities are able to 'say no' to a project; and the range of different outcomes that might follow, be it economic decline or the emergence of local enterprise.

Editorial Conclusion: Arcticness by any other name

Ilan Kelman

Does Arcticness convey power and voice from the north? Does it disempower, with an alien concept and artificial construct foisted on diverse peoples and regions who have little in common apart from living at high latitudes?

The chapters within this book open this conversation, dissect the concepts, put forth numerous queries and provide few answers. They do provide pathways towards responding plus indications of the variety of answers which exist. In problematising and de-problematising both the Arctic and Arcticness, they promote and dispute views from inside and outside the region, embracing and challenging multiple definitions.

Consequently, the diversity of the Arctic and of Arcticness emerges. Diversity which, perhaps, is so wide-ranging as to deny any graspable description or characteristics of what referring to the Arctic really means. Yet an undeniable materiality of high latitudes produces an environment-including climate, geology, ecosystems, biota, air, water, land and ice-shaping life and livelihoods differently than environments at lower latitudes.

While also displaying similarities. The comparative chapters illustrate this. High altitudes sport similarities with its anagram of high latitudes, as demonstrated by Tibet. Small, resource-dependent communities produce analogues between Greenland and Uganda. Other topics remain unexplored, such as high-latitude communities in the southern hemisphere, although those extend to a mere 55°S, far in distance and concept from many definitions of polar areas.

One consequence is that northern high-latitude communities are unique on Earth. Mountain communities might have similar climates, but they do not enjoy the day-night imbalance witnessed throughout Arctic summers and winters. Nor do mountain communities (by definition) necessarily sit at low elevations, including sea level, as numerous Arctic communities do.

This level of similarity around the northern latitudes cannot by itself define a region. The multiple definitions of Arctic attest to the peoples being more than their environments.

It is not even clear that all peoples living at high northern latitudes share an assumption of being Arcticly similar. Many certainly do, entirely embracing the Arctic concept and seeking out those at matching latitudes. Others accept Arctic similarities without presuming those to entail uniqueness from non-Arctic peoples. Many reject both premises, challenging the importance or differentiation of the Arctic from elsewhere.

No view is especially right or wrong. People are entitled to their perspectives and to act according to their own Arctic-related wishes. Then, what does it mean for Arcticness and what does Arcticness mean? This volume's contributions and contributors answer with mixed results on a solid baseline through a series of contrasts which are complementary rather than contradictory. Notions of Arcticness are material and emotional; products and processes; manufactured externally and coming from the people as who they are; an innate and prevalent trait of living in the region; and an assemblage according to what the assembler desires.

A danger coalesces of Arcticness being everything and nothing. It represents exceptionality and uniqueness-just like everyone and everywhere else!! Nevertheless, these apparent incongruities do not obviate the need, desire or utility of Arcticness. Arcticness permits expression of what is felt and seen from being in and from the Arctic, alongside what is felt and seen externally. It both gives and takes both power and voice.