PArt 1 Arcticness Emerging

Maintaining my Arcticness

Heather sauyaq Jean Gordon

My name is Heather Sauyaq Jean Gordon. My Iñupiaq name, Sauyaq, means drum in Alaska Seward Peninsula Iñupiaq. I was given this name as an adult, when I was 31 in 2016. My Great Aunt Peggy Perry (Aunt Peg) died, and my Grandmother passed her name on to me. I work daily to speak out, be heard and carry the beat of my culture in my heart. My Aunt Peg was an opinionated and hilarious woman. I strive to keep her alive in me. Aunt Peg was a beader. She beaded for around 15 to 20 years before she died. She beaded earrings, necklaces and bracelets, as well as a few other ventures that she tried out when interested. I always loved her beading. When I was in my late teens, she taught me to bead a strap to hold glasses around my neck. I never finished that project. However, I always wanted to be able to bead like her.

In 2015, I was six years into graduate school and struggling with knowing who I was, and who I wanted to be. I felt detached from the original reason I went to graduate school, to become a professor. I wondered if that truly was a way to best help the Iñupiaq people. I was feeling that being in school was potentially a selfish endeavour and was concerned about what route I should take. In the fall of 2015, I came across the Indigenous Studies programme at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. This programme reinvigorated my interest in self-determination, sustainability and well-being in the lives of Iñupiaq people. Yet, I still felt something missing. I now knew what I wanted to be, an advocate for selfdetermination and well-being. I still did not know who I was.

I knew I was an Iñupiaq woman of mixed heritage. I knew I grew up in Homer, Alaska, outside of Iñupiaq lands. Yet, I did not feel separated from the land, as I grew up raising reindeer and living a subsistence lifestyle. I travelled to Alaska Native villages to do construction work while I was in high school. In the villages I was exposed to Alaska Native beading. It was beautiful.

I conducted my master's research in Greenland from 2010 to 2012. While there, I met fantastic artists. The women beaded beautiful National costumes, earrings and even coasters for coffee mugs on the table. Their art was inspirational. These women were my Inuit cousins who had travelled from Alaska many years earlier to settle in Greenland. I felt a connection with them and their art. I also was able to eat Native food in Greenland: seal, whale, fish and much more. These experiences brought back my tie to the Arctic and the Arcticness I shared with Indigenous people in the circumpolar North, made me miss Alaska, and made me question what it meant to me to be an Inuit woman. Now, in 2015 I was living in Madison, Wisconsin, as I had been since 2009 for my master's programme. I knew few Native people and no other Alaska Natives in the area. Facebook seemed like my main connection to Alaska, except for the trips home I would make in the summer for fishing and berry picking. I sought help from a Ho-Chunk trained non-Native counsellor and she taught me about the four aspects of a healthy life: spiritual, mental, physical and emotional. My life met the mental, physical and emotional but not the spiritual aspects. I had little connection to my Iñupiaq culture and felt disconnected from Alaska while living in Wisconsin.

I looked back at my knowledge of Iñupiaq culture. I thought of the beading I learned from my Aunt Peg, the women in the rural villages I visited while doing construction and the women in Greenland. I felt that beading was my connection to Alaska and being Iñupiaq. It was my connection not only to my Indigenous identity but also to my sense of Arcticness while living so far from the North. So, I began beading earrings.

In the spring of 2016, my Aunt Peg died. It was then that I was given her name. I felt her spirit within me and wanted to continue on her legacy of beading. When we were going through her home, I was given the opportunity to go through her beading room. Her beads were everywhere. There were patterns, needles and just everything. I felt her presence and it made me so happy that I could continue doing for her what she loved. I chose beads that would allow me to do work similar to what she had been doing. It was then that I came across a beaded glass ornament. It was absolutely stunning. When I came home I started beading ornaments in addition to the earrings I already made. I want to keep her memory alive.

I had begun beading in the fall of 2015. After my Aunt died, beading became very important to me and is now a part of my life that I regularly practise (Figures 2.1 and 2.2). It calms me, makes me feel the