They can, therefore, often serve as a 'kind of master algorithm that colours and constrains the orientations and activities of other movements'. 31 Scholarship in energy justice research remains theoretically, conceptually and contextually bound. This section concludes with a reflection not only on unbinding energy justice research from pre-set notions of justice, but also its conceptualisation of 'environment'.

Theoretical accounts of energy justice threaten, first, to bind researchers into pre-determined logics of justice.For Caney, justice research has hitherto focused on exposing and proposing archetypal normative frameworks.In support of Agyeman and colleagues,Reed and George comment, 'researchers are cautioned that the long-observed disconnect between theory and practice in the field of environmental justice may be exacerbated should academics become more concerned with theoretical refinement over progressive, practical, and possible change'.The theorisation of justice seeks to expose ideal end points (and more recently processes) from various philosophical traditions. For example, Okereke finds that any notions or principles of justice originate from five distinct incarnations: utilitarianism, communitarianism, liberal equality, justice as meeting needs and libertarianism 36-later refined to include 'market justice'.In a similar vein, Schlosberg argues that justice theorists need to be pluralist in accepting a range of understandings of 'good'.It is argued here that we need instead to explore the plurality of injustice.

The first step in this direction is indeed the acknowledgement that the study of justice is pluralist. Martin et al. acknowledge, 'that justice poses considerable conceptual challenges, not least because of the practical (if not intellectual) impossibility of reaching consensus'. 39 This is borne out by a valiant theoretical sortie through the myriad of approaches to conclude that justice is both plural and multi-dimensional. Their conclusion bears a self-reflective unease; 'we clearly have much to learn about the limitations of our own framing and methods, including our inevitable starting point in logics of justice'.The second move involves an acknowledgement that justice is contextualist, whereby some principles may apply in certain situations. Walker comments, 'as we move from concern to concern and from context to context, we can expect shifts in both the spatial relations that are seen to be significant and in the nature of justice claims being made'.Ideal justice theorists seek to effectively eliminate the potential for conflict. Schlosberg comments, however, 'such theorists are mistaken  (c)onflicts of justice arise  problem solving entails the negotiation of different conceptions of (in)justice in and across participants, from community or stakeholder groups to corporations or states'. 42 Schlosberg claims that the idea of environmental justice has 'examined multiple reasons for the construction of injustice'. 43 This chapter calls, however, for an exploration of the construction of multiple injustices. An expansion in the theorisation of environmental justice as a concept must be answered with a similar response in our understanding of environmental activism. As Barnett comments in support of Sen:Rather than thinking of philosophy as a place to visit in order to find idealised models of justice or radically new ontologies, we would do well to notice that there is an identifiable shift among moral and political philosophers towards starting from more worldly, intuitive understandings of injustice, indignation, and harm, and building up from there.Second, the recent development of normative concepts of justice looms in a similar manner. There is a sense (to some extent correct) that such concepts are worldly, emerging from situated conflict. They are, however, more often emerging from philosophical debate. A set of normative testable assumptions materialise based upon achieving equity and fairness in the distributional, post-distributional-referred to as 'recognition' largely attributed to Nancy Fraserand developed by Schlosberg 47-and procedural burdens of environmental risk. We of course explore procedural and recognition forms in this chapter.

However, the analytical objective identification of injustice can be blind to the experiential perception of spatial constructs. The more recent attempt to uncover a third form of energy justice tenets as the 'post-distributive justice of recognition' threatens, for example, to unintentionally disrobe those who are unrecognised of any meaningful agency.Even though Fraser firmly identifies social movements as key agents of change, 49 the emphasis is on the call for 'authorities' and 'policy-makers' to recognise under-represented groups-such as in Walker and Day.Framing research emphasises, in contrast, the need to explore such processes among those who are 'under-recognised' in order to gain insight into the success or not in mobilising against injustices. They are often referred to not as 'victims', but rather as 'non-activists', and as posing a new challenge for justice research.

Third, our approach to energy justice remains contextually bound. In this vein, the energy justice 'master' frame is derived from specific empirical contexts-in this case the Arctic. The origins of energy justice research are accepted to be race-and poverty-based campaigns involving multiple organisations and individuals across the USA merging into a veritable energy justice movement-often cited as beginning in Warren County, North Carolina. 51 And thus, the energy justice master frame in the USA is formed around race, class, gender and the environment. Taylor talks explicitly about the 'environmental justice paradigm' as a master frame which links together 'environment, race, class, gender and social justice' issues.