Nevertheless, a case can be made that traditional pastoral risk management may be insufficient for dealing with climate change.In theory-depending on the spatial scale of extreme weather events-mobility has the potential to provide pastoralists with recourse from the most detrimental effects of climate change because they may be able to move away from the affected areas (and thus increase the herds' recuperative potential). I have already discussed the relationship between survival and body mass: animals in good condition are better equipped to deal with harsh environmental conditions. They might survive for a longer period of time during a drought, for example, than those in poor conditions-basically they have a longer window of time to lose body mass before starving to death. In terms of climate change, where we expect-as well as have observed-that the frequency and duration of extreme events like drought, icing, snowstorms, etc., will increase, keeping animals in good condition seems to be an important strategy.

The apparent paradox is that privatisation and subsequent fragmentation has the exact opposite effect: it increases density-dependent food limitation for animals by either intensifying grazing in a limited area or circumscribing too many animals in a limited area, or both. With fencing restricting movement, pastoralists have inadequate opportunity to offset these effects: it is therefore expected that-on average-body mass and condition decrease, making livestock more susceptible to environmental hazards. It should come as no surprise, then, that it has been argued that it is not climate change by itself that is problematic for pastoralists but rather 'the limitations imposed on pastoral coping and development strategies, especially their ability to move and to access critical resources in different territories' (p. 3).Consequently, it may not be mobility per se that fails, but rather mobility in increasingly fragmented landscapes.

Another traditional and efficient strategy utilised by pastoralists to buffer environmental variation is herd accumulation.Among Saami reindeer herders in Norway it has been shown that herders with large herds have comparably larger herds from one year to the next 110 as well as before and after crisis periods.While herd accumulation seems to be an efficient strategy, it is predicated on periods of recuperation when herd growth is possible. In fact, a delay in recuperation after environmental-induced losses has been argued to be one of the main problems of pastoral production.Herd accumulation can thus be expected to work less efficiently, if at all, when the frequency of extreme events increases. Pertinently, cooperation is an integral part of pastoral production and has been found to be prerequisite for efficiently accumulating herd size: pastoralists with extensive cooperative networks seem to do better-measured in terms of herd size-than pastoralists with less extensive networks.aurora with terrifying beauty the sky alight with flame shimmering and quivering the soul shan't be the same the wispy, haunting tendrils sear down from up above remote from their oppression of life and lore and love the spirit's chilled by wonder its ceaseless awe is pain this ecstasy of torture a universe insane

We propose the application of an emerging research agenda in 'energy justice' to consider Arcticness in the context of energy exploration in the Arctic region. We define Arcticness as a process (rather than a state of being) of bringing voice to those affected by change in the Arctic. It is important not to objectify Arcticness as this will lead inevitably to exclusion. We should instead subjectify in the context of past, present and future changing trajectories-a changing process. We therefore need frameworks for exploring and indeed promoting this changing process of 'Arctic voice'. Energy justice is a framework that is able to contribute to this process. The context of change in this chapter is not the climate, but rather energy exploration. Almost a third of the world's undiscovered gas and 13 per cent of the world's undiscovered oil may be found there, mostly offshore under less than 500 meters of water.In an age of resource depletion, researchers need to pay greater attention to justice concerns in energy policy. In particular, energy exploration-and the resulting energy infrastructure that is built in the Arctic and across the world as a result of the energy resources being extracted-is a major concern for the world. This is even more important when considering the knowledge the global research community published in 2016 and highlighted: (1) temperatures in the Arctic are running at 20°C higher than normal at this time of year; 2 and (2) because of the high temperatures there will be 19 'tipping points' in the Arctic region that will suffer severe consequences and there will be direct effects felt by many countries around the globe.Energy justice provides a framework for assessing the justice implications-or simply the injustices-of current policy decisions as well as making practical recommendations. In this chapter we identify some key injustices and recommendations with regards to uncovering Arcticness. We finish with a call for research into 'frames of injustice' beyond those currently promoted by existing energy justice scholarship.

The energy justice framework

A wide range of the modern-day justice conceptualisations that exist, including environmental, (anti-)global, climate and now energy justice are, to different extents, rooted in finding voice for the excluded. 'Environmental justice' aims to act '(where) people of colour and lower socio-economic status are disproportionately affected by pollution, the siting of toxic waste dumps, and other Locally Unwanted Land Uses (LULUs)'.