In conclusion, and at the risk of stating the obvious, Arcticness is not a static value but essentially the rich and dynamic processes of outward-and inward-looking imagination, identity-building and establishing belonging motivated by a plethora of reasons. In the narrower scope of states' Arcticness, it is just as Rostoks 51 writes (drawing on Wendt)'The Arctic is what States make of it'. So is Arcticness what states make of it: a social construction of identities, interests and power politics in an arguably anarchic system? With political debates once again turning to competing narratives of human nature as projections of the Arctic's future fate-split between (neo)liberal assumptions of cooperation and (neo)realist warnings of looming conflict and hostile competition-a more balanced view is sometimes lacking. Yet it takes only an innately 'empty' concept such as 'Arcticness' to demonstrate how a social construct and related discourse becomes an instrument of power politics in a state's toolbox.In the wider context, it is the shared ideas and interactions of different actors that over time have given meaning to the notions of Arcticness, in fact creating them to begin with. Arcticness then emerges from the perceptions and resulting collective images of outsiders, built upon backward-looking sets of historical legacies and forwardlooking alleged threats and opportunities driven by economic, political, technological and environmental factors. Environmental factors in particular have had an enormous effect on Arcticness being characterised as an integrated, distinct region, seen as 'either an ecologically protected space or as a space of natural resource exploitation'.This puts the Arctic on the map again and contributes to northern countries' empowerment due to their potential to be a local resource rather than just a global environmental problem. Finally, Arcticness is powerfully affected and effected by efforts to utilise or manipulate the common perception based on globalised (neo)liberal values and fantasies, especially among younger generations. Hence, Arcticness is becoming what states and actors make of it. At heart, it is an issue of identity, power and interest-formation.

6 Arcticness insights

Anne Merrild Hansen

What is special about people living in the Arctic? Do we have more in common with other Northerners than we do with people living south of the Arctic Circle? What makes us what we are? These are the types of questions I started wondering about when I was confronted with the term 'Arcticness' in relation to the creation of this book. Being a Northerner myself, and based on my experiences as an Arctic researcher conducting fieldwork across the region, my view is that there is a special bond among Northerners and also particular values and interests that we commonly share.

I believe that the Arctic environments shape the lives of its peoples, the traditions, views and livelihoods. Dark winters and light summers, remote settlements and sparse resources are features that bring the communities together. But there are also great differences. While people in Barrow, Alaska, are living on the open frozen tundra, Greenlanders are living in coastal areas surrounded by mountains and Saami nomads are crossing large distances inland every year. Even though there are common challenges related to living in the Arctic, the environments in the different countries vary and influence peoples' ways of living.

Other things besides the environment influence and frame the life of Northerners. Human decisions on local, national and international scales and actions throughout history influence the way we live and perceive ourselves. The perception of what an Arctic identity is and entails is therefore as unique to communities as it is to individuals. In this chapter, I focus not on the differences but rather on the common characteristics of Arctic peoples, the Northerners.

Based on my biased expectation of an Arctic identity being a reality and to reflect on the potential characteristics and to gather inspiration for this chapter I reached out to my cross-Arctic network through my personal profile on social media (LinkedIn and Facebook) and asked my connections what they find is special about being Northerners. I particularly encouraged my contacts from the Arctic region to finalise the sentence: 'You know you are from the Arctic when ?'

More than forty responses were posted within a few days, from people living in Russia, Norway, Iceland, Greenland/ Denmark and Alaska. A few asked me to contact them privately and this led to interesting and good conversations on the topic of Arcticness. As expected, most responses came from Greenland where my Arctic network is widest.

Not claiming the results from this small social media exercise to be representative in any manner for the opinions of Northerners in general, I still find that they point to general characteristics, which I will share here as they offer insights into how we as Northerners see our own reflections in other Northerners. The responses were, probably, partly due to the publicity on social media and partly due to the populist way I formulated the question, written with a focus on positive features and not on negative perspectives of living in the Arctic. There was a romantic tone in many of the replies and not a single sarcastic reaction. These inputs from my Arctic connections supplemented and nuanced my own reflections. I found them both funny and thoughtful and I have to a large extent used them in the following. I do not claim to point at cultural markers and I would never dare to try to define what identifies a Northerner.