While the challenging work of seeking equitable, just and environmentally sound practices around natural resource projects has been much studied, we know too little about the societal consequences of anticipated but ultimately unrealised projects. In this article we explore three cases of Arctic extractive industry developments-in Russia, Norway and Greenland-where a highly anticipated extractive industry development has failed to take place. We consider the local expectations around the development and how the fact of it not taking place has affected local peoples' perceptions of their future prospects.

What is characteristically 'Arctic' about Arctic extractive industries?

Given the overall theme of the volume, we reflect here on some of the commonalities of Arctic extractive industry development. Why does it make sense to review our three Arctic case studies in conjunction with one another?

One shared factor is the extreme sensitivity of the Arctic environment and the length of time it takes for damaged ecosystems to recover. By expanding further into the Arctic, extractive industry exploration is increasingly encroaching on isolated and vulnerable territories, often on indigenous peoples' lands or in the waters where they hunt or fish. This environmental and social vulnerability has drawn extreme levels of global concern about the prospect of extractive industries expanding further into the Arctic, as indicated by the campaigns of international environmental non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and indigenous rights groups.The risks include climate change, which is a dominant feature of global Arctic discourses.

Second, it may make sense to compare Arctic case studies simply because Arctic stakeholders themselves make these intra-regional comparisons. Three decades of post-Cold War 'region building' in the circumpolar north make it likely that Arctic communities look first to one another for lessons learned; likewise for companies and regional governments in their planning and policy-making. Ever stronger links are being built between Arctic (and sub-Arctic) indigenous groups, sub-state regions and communities. Links are strengthened through international academic and civil society networks; increasingly strong international legal and regulatory guidelines, some of which are Arctic-specific, such as those issued by the Arctic Council; and increased use of social media. This having been said, comparative analysis between Arctic and nonArctic regions is also extremely valuable.A widely shared feature across the Arctic is the historical tendency towards establishing single-industry or 'one company' towns ('monotowns' in Russia) at the heart of which is a single, dominant or 'town-forming' industry.Single-industry towns have often faced repeated boom and bust cycles related largely to the price of commodities on global markets, and frequently leading to extreme poverty and social dislocation.This type of development push is sometimes interpreted in terms of centre-periphery economic development, associated with large states and colonial or imperial expansion, where the far flung corners of a polity provide raw materials to be processed and marketed in and for the imperial or national 'centre'.The government may have identified the lands where the resources are to be extracted as being 'unproductive', despite them being highly productive from an indigenous perspective. 8 An overwhelming focus on extractive industries in the political economy and development planning is sometimes dubbed 'extractivism'.In the Arctic context, this has been contrasted to the indigenous cosmologies based on sustainable resource use with which extractivist policies and projects frequently come into conflict.As Arctic communities and resources have become incorporated into global capitalist markets, the focus has mostly been on largescale high-investment development of internationally valued Arctic resources-oil, gas, minerals, timber and fish. This kind of 'single point' economic development encourages a continuation of the 'single industry' vision of twentieth-century expansion, with bold versions of the future or efforts to 'save' the community via one grand project. 11 Policymakers in national capitals rarely envision an economic future for Arctic communities that is as complex and multifaceted as those anticipated for more southern towns and cities.

Moreover, the high cost of such ambitious, monolithic development planning in the Arctic means that a drop in commodity prices might translate rapidly into the withdrawal of investment from expensive and risk-laden Arctic environments. The oil price collapse of 2014/ 2015 triggered the withdrawal of a number of oil majors from Greenland, while the rise of the shale gas industry in the United States drove down gas prices and contributed to the decline in investor interest in Russia's Shtokman project (see case studies in this chapter). In rare cases, a community has the opportunity to decide themselves whether or not an extractive industry development should go ahead. One such case, in Norway's Kautokeino municipality, is also discussed below.

Any anticipated, yet unrealised, major economic development projects-and the regulatory, stakeholder, business and scientific processes that attend them-can be seen as resulting in 'unbuilt environments' of often invisible effects.In some cases, infrastructure is actually constructed without being used, or is used for only one or two exploration seasons, such as the abandoned oil industry harbour infrastructure built in the Greenlandic village of Aasiaat. After a brief review of methods, we turn to three case studies of such 'unbuilt environments' in the Arctic, in Greenland, Russia and Norway respectively. We seek to explore and identify some of these effects, considering what might be characteristically 'Arctic' about them. We also consider the ways in which our analyses diverge, and how this illustrates the diversity of Arctic experience.