Following the 2012 vote, Arctic Gold challenged the legality of that decision; offered to carry out a social impact assessment (not mandatory according to Norwegian law); and excluded the southern part of the proposed mining area, which was most important for herding. They drafted an agreement with the municipality to support local business, culture and infrastructure. Arctic Gold's CEO also offered a one-off payment of NOK 20 million and stated that a further 'no' would mean that Norway's mining legislation was not working properly. He was labelled 'arrogant' in the press: a picture of him in a Texan hat was circulated on social media and he was dubbed 'the cowboy'. A second refusal came in December 2013, with a similar narrow majority (10-9). Company representatives admitted they had not realised the importance of reindeer herding.Arctic Gold indicated that a further attempt was possible after Kautokeino's municipal elections in September 2015. However, the new council announced immediately that there would be no further discussion about the mine for the rest of their four-year term in office, as they wanted to focus on other things. The current moratorium is not a definitive 'no' and much remains to be done if the conflict is not going to emerge again.

Local perceptions and responses

One of the most striking observations from Kautokeino was the powerful effect that the mere prospect of the mine had on the community. It exacerbated tensions along existing fault lines, with non-herding Saami claiming that the herders did not want the rest of the community to develop and revealing resentment at the legal rights that have been afforded the reindeer herders to date. A strong supporting voice for the mine came from the political party that was established to defend the interests of non-reindeer herding Saami following the enhancement of legal rights for herders. Views were not always clear cut, however, and pro-and contra-groups were also deeply intertwined through family and communal ties.

Another striking observation was the contrast in different ways of imagining the future, between the state and the community, and within the community itself. For instance, researchers at Kautokeino's Saami University College have explored the chasm between the state vision of future resource development, based on grand economic projects underpinned by science and technology, versus the longer-term and historically rooted vision of the herders, based on customary practice, adaptive management and collective use of land, rather than private ownership.One positive reason for supporting the mine proposal was the potential for enlivening the local economy. Local residents remembered the previous period when the mine was open. At that time there was also a military camp, and mine workers and soldiers visited the community, people went out more, spent more money and the community was livelier. People also remembered that wages at the mine were higher than in other places locally.

A few local businesses would directly benefit from the re-opening of the mine, for example those that provide drilling services or specialist machinery. Kautokeino is heavily reliant on public sector employmentwhich is reportedly 70-75 per cent of total employment (compared to the town of Alta to the north, which has more commerce and where only 30 per cent of jobs are in the public sector). In Kautokeino, there are few shops and people regularly go shopping in Alta-a three-hour bus journey away-but are reluctant to set up their own shops. For some, the mine would be the answer to economic stagnation in the village.

One business respondent, however, observed that all the talk of the mine was draining positive energy and enterprise potential from the community:

It has such as psychological impact. The thought that this could be the solution. It's like a grey cloud. Because young people want to stay. They want to go and get an education and then come back and use it. There is huge potential. We kill this potential with the mine question. I'm afraid of this more than the mining itself.In 2015, a local official closely involved with the municipal council decision pointed out that of Norway's 428 municipalities only a few have mines: 'The illusion that a municipality has to have a mine or it dies is not true. We can benefit from a mine but there are other opportunities.'He emphasised the sustainability of the reindeer herding industry in Kautokeino and the fact that it is a large part of the reason why young people want to stay in the municipality. The official stated that the mine decision was primarily about Saami responsibility for traditional lands, and the need to respect international indigenous rights. Norway has ratified the International Labour Organisation Convention No.169 on Indigenous and Tribal; and supports the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2007), both of which require local level decision making by indigenous communities relating to resource extraction projects. The official said there would be no further negotiation with extractive companies unless there is dialogue between those companies and the rights holders themselves. There has also been talk of setting aside the land permanently for reindeer pasture, but he observed that this would not be supported by many in the local community and would be a very complex process.