While elements of these narratives are present in the Greenlandic context, the picture is more complicated. Greenlanders are conflicted over various aspects of oil development. This is highlighted in a poll of 721 Greenlanders undertaken in autumn 2013, where it was found half supported drilling and just under half opposed the activity.Oceans North Canada, who conducted the poll on behalf of the Inuit Circumpolar Council, Greenland, cited Greenlanders' strong cultural connections to the sea combined with the perceived risks this would have on important sectors such as seafood and tourism as reasons for those unsupportive of oil development. 78 However, much like Uganda, questions of good governance are ubiquitous within the debate, with the same poll highlighting how the majority felt the government were not doing enough to inform the public, remain transparent or put adequate safeguards in place.It is relevant to note that community perceptions of oil development will depend on the stage of the project cycle, proximity to the oil wells and associated infrastructure and cultural and economic ties to the areas of extraction. Much Arctic oil development, as in the case of Greenland, finds itself at an early stage of the project cycle. As such, they are surrounded by considerable uncertainty and many unknowns exacerbated by rapid regional change. In Greenland, where oil development is proposed to take place in seas that represent sites of cultural and economic significance, community opposition, or at least greater scepticism, is likely.

This chapter has sought to better understand the concept of 'Arcticness' through the lens of resource frontier narratives in Greenland and Uganda. Somewhat surprising is the amount of similarity in the discussion of material, public good, governance and community themes. On the material characteristics of oil development, both contexts exhibit limited oil infrastructure, challenging economic conditions, technological hurdles and the potential for significant socio-environmental impacts, while Arcticness is characterised by the extremity of oil development in Greenland. Both the Arctic region and sub-Saharan Africa spark global interest; for example creating a marine sanctuary in the Arctic Ocean's international waters and the global fight against poverty in less developed countries such as Uganda. While climate change, a challenge with significant global interest, is present in both resource frontier narratives, it is dominant in Greenland and thus tightly interwoven with the concept of Arcticness.

There are also similarities related to the challenge of governing the sectors in Greenland and Uganda, including the politics of getting the legislative frameworks in place, potential governance loopholes, and the influence of international actors in the 'good governance' of the sector. Modes of cooperative governance are characteristic of the Arctic and at the pan-African level, while cooperation remains elusive in the context of East African oil development as countries compete aggressively for foreign direct investment and oil infrastructure projects. Thus governance of oil and gas development at the regional level in East Africa remains mired in zero sum politics between nation states. Finally, communities in both contexts felt that a lack of information and transparency about the sector were significant issues. However, in Uganda the public is generally pro-oil whereas in Greenland sentiment is rather more mixed.

This chapter has demonstrated that Arctic resource development actually shares much in common with resource frontiers elsewhere. Nevertheless, Arcticness is still a prominent feature of Greenland's oil story. The extremity of oil development, the impact of climate change, the opportunities for cooperative governance, and the mixed community sentiment on whether oil development should proceed highlight aspects of 'Arcticness' in Greenland's resource frontier. Scopes and limits of 'Arcticness':

Arctic livelihoods, marine mammals and the law nikolas sellheim

Introduction

The Arctic has become a prominent feature in the current media landscape. It seems fair to say that not a day goes by on which climate change, perceived geopolitical tensions and resource exploitation do not surface in popular media outlets. As a consequence of the environmental changes altering the narrative of the 'frozen north', the Arctic has moved from being perceived as a frontier to a centrepiece of everyday discourse. But only recently, and most notably with the establishment of the Arctic Council in 1996, the notion of the Arctic as a home has entered the popular understanding on the north. This chapter explores how the Arctic and its peoples are perceived and constructed in international legal regimes. By focusing on controversial marine mammal hunts, in particular the hunt for seals and whales, it examines how legal regimes construe 'Arcticness', 1 how the parameters are set to determine a legitimate or illegitimate hunt and in how far Arctic economies are consequently framed. A focus on marine mammal hunts, which constitute a highly emotional activity, was chosen as they best exemplify the difficulties of reconciling the imagination of Arctic cultures and the empirical realities in Arctic communities. While drawing on a hermeneutical analysis of available documentation, the chapter is complemented by the author's observations at the 66th meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in 2016.

Arctic peoples in international legal regimes-the case of marine mammal hunting

From very early on, the Arctic has played a crucial role in international legal regimes. This was not related to the perception of the Arctic as a distinct region, but rather to the abundance of marine resources-particularly whales and seals. Their overexploitation prompted states to conclude bi-and multi-lateral agreements in order to ensure the sustainability of the stocks and, later on, to sustain a viable industry for their exploitation.