Social relations and togetherness are widely practised and Northerners are generally open and welcoming. Get-togethers involve a lot of eating, often including sweets and cakes along with local delicacies such as fermented shark, sheep, raw whale skin or special cuts of moose or bear meat1). Storytelling and sharing at gatherings contribute to upholding what we perceive as a good quality of life.

Meat we eat

The selection of goods in Arctic communities is often limited. Natural fresh food resources such as muskox, caribou, seal, fish, berries, seaweed, sea birds, mussels, mushrooms, whale and moose are free and available, so subsistence hunting and fishing are activities of great

importance to Northerners. As the vegetation is insignificant due to the cold, the storms, permafrost and rocky ground, greens are hard to grow. Meat is therefore an indispensable part of the Arctic diet.

Limited infrastructure and long transport distances mean that supplies are often expensive and sparse. Self-sufficiency is an important contribution to Arctic diets. Even in the larger Arctic towns where the stores can provide most goods, hunting, fishing and gathering are still considered essential for well-being and are practised both for recreational purposes and to supply food.

As hunting and fishing are such an integrated part of living, access to relevant tools is essential. Several responses I received from my Arctic network about Arcticness were about how easy it is to access weapons and how common it is to carry and use a rifle. One emphasised that 'You know you are in the Arctic when you can walk into a bank with a rifle on your shoulder and not be arrested' and another said that you know you are from the Arctic 'When you can walk into a store and buy a rifle on special offer; but milk won't be in till at least Wednesday (true story)'.

People in the Arctic have a strong bond with nature and time is spent in the wild; hiking, skiing, climbing and sailing. And the cold does not bother Northerners. As one stated, 'When the temperature at the lake rises to +5°C, children start to swim'. We also know how to dress in the cold. Clothing made of leather, fur and wool is commonly used and as one stated: 'You know you are from the Arctic when your date wears long wool underwear even in the summer'. Dressing warmly is something we naturally prioritise, and we learn to dress in layers. During time spent on the land, meat is gathered, which is why you often see animals and fish being cut outdoors; chunks of meat hanging outside buildings to tenderise, or lying spread on rocks for drying, or hanging on racks. Skins are similarly being treated by hand and hung to dry. Butchering is a skill that is passed on to the younger generations and blood is an inherent part of this. Northerners therefore have a relaxed attitude to killing and butchering and one of the responses underlined this with the statement: You know that you are from the Arctic 'when you think people are strange who get sick by the sight or smell of blood'.

The interconnectedness of characteristics and perspectives on quality of life in the Arctic

As described in the previous sections, the Arcticness characteristics highlighted all relate to each other (The love of silence is related to the love of the land that provides the meat we eat and the way we live in remote communities where there is room to be different and still be a part of the community. The Arctic environment offers the frames and the resources in which identities, traditions, norms and values of Northerners are developed; frames which are to some extent similar and resources which are similarly rich in some ways and similarly sparse in others.

My personal experience is that the common frames and resources mean that it is easy to be in the company of other Northerners. We laugh and cry over the same things and share similar experiences and in this way recognise our own reflections in each other. That is why we feel comfortable and understood by our Arctic neighbours to a larger extent more than we do with others.

In everyday life, we seldom stop and consider what it is that makes our life what it is. We are not consciously reflecting characteristics or

values, but the values present in our life make sense and fill it with what for us is the prerequisite for quality of life. Returning to the question of what Arcticness entails, I think that the overall main characteristic of a Northerner is a person who loves and thrives in the Arctic. Northerners live in the Arctic not because they have to, but because they want to.

While a somewhat caricatured story, strangely enough it is a description that fits the situation currently facing herders on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateauand might as well be the future for reindeer herders in the Arctic parts of Norway. On the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, re-allocation of grazing areas and fencing has been going on since the early 1980s 2 and has already resulted in war-like conditions. A dispute relating to grazing rights resulted in the deaths of at least 29 Tibetans between 1997 and 1999: starting small, the dispute soon escalated into periodic armed fighting, involving some 2,000 fighters using automatic and semi-automatic weapons.