Denmark first invoked the Declaration at the IWC meeting in 2008 and intervened on behalf of Greenland and the Faroe Islands and contrary to the EU's common position.In addition, at the 2016 meeting of the IWC, which the author attended, Denmark defended the interests of Greenland in particular. For example, although no quota was allocated to Greenland's Aboriginal Subsistence Whaling hunts for 2013/ 14, several whales were taken by Greenlanders. Several anti-whaling nations considered this an infraction and stated that the act should therefore be treated as such. Denmark, however, disagreed with this assessment and explicitly referred to the subsistence needs of Greenlanders that were met by taking a small number of whales.Whether or not the EU took the same view cannot be ascertained, but given the EU states' normative alignment with the anti-whaling nations in the IWC, it can be presumed that the EU would consider the hunts an infraction. Indeed, Denmark surfaced prominently at the IWC meeting and openly represented Greenlandic interests. Although the author did not attend the coordination meetings of the EU, Greenland's arguments appeared to imply they considered Declaration 25 to still be valid. Or to put it differently, Denmark openly voiced its support of Greenlandic whaling given its inherent part of Greenlandic culture and livelihood.

'Arcticness' in other legal contexts

It goes without saying that the Arctic and 'Arcticness' play a significant role in other contexts, particularly as regards climate change mitigation and adaptation. These issues will only be touched upon here very briefly. In general, the significance of the impact of climate change on the Arctic region shifted onto the world's agenda after publication of the seminal Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) 36 in 2004/ 05. After release of the report, the Arctic Eight all released their respective Arctic strategies in which they committed to different goals while at the same time tackling climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and fostering 'green' economies. Moreover, the ACIA report helped to bring the Arctic more closely into the scope of the international climate change regime. Since the third and fourth assessment reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 2001 and 2007 respectively, the Arctic has become an integral part of the regime.Although, from an environmental perspective, this appears to correspond with the interests of Arctic peoples, the situation is slightly more complex. The role of Greenland in the climate change regime is twofold: on the one hand, Greenland's population depends on the Arctic environment and suffers greatly from melting ice.On the American side, a legal expression of 'Arcticness' was uttered when in 2005 the Inuit Circumpolar Conference (now Council) filed a petition to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights over the emissions of the United States, constituting human rights violations due to climate change implications. Similarly, the Arctic Athabascan Council filed a similar petition over Canada's black carbon emissions in 2013. Although Arctic indigenous groups, in particular, frequently highlight the adverse effects of climate change on the natural environment, Sejersen presents a stunning insight into the 'other' side of the climate change debate, namely the new opportunities, for example as regards hydrocarbon exploitation, for Arctic communities. This is especially the case in the context of Greenland's aspirations for independence. Sejersen shows how industrial mega projects have now become a political and economic reality in Greenland, which is often still portrayed as a remote and somewhat backward orientated island in the Arctic.While the above discussion appears to imply that the legal reflection of 'Arcticness' is limited to environmental factors such as resource abundance or climatic changes, a brief look should be taken at soft-law means of cooperation in the north.The Barents Euro-Arctic Council stands out in this regard as this north-eastern European organisation goes much further than environmental cooperation. 'Arcticness' or a common identity as part of the Barents Region has spawned cooperative structures for education, health and social issues, transportation, youth or investment.While this cooperation is not based on legally-binding documents, but on declarations and Memoranda of Understanding, the Council reflects the regional understanding of the legal 'Arcticness', inevitably dealing with more tangible issues that have direct and immediate effect on the people in the region.

In the context of marine mammal hunting, in particular, the concept of 'Arcticness' is primarily linked with specific understandings of Arctic peoples and economies. These understandings largely correspond to those narratives that were applied in the early regimes more than 100 years ago that regulate and manage marine mammal hunting activities. This view on the Arctic therefore romanticises and 'museifies' the Arctic with little regard for the socio-economic conditions that have arisen over the last 50 years or so. The legal frameworks reflect these narratives and create a legal space for Arctic cultures with significant impact on living conditions in the high north. As a result, Arctic peoples appear to be put in boxes from which it is difficult for them to escape. Only through targeted 'securitising moves' 42 that use the legal and political environment in which Arctic peoples are located can these narratives be challenged. These moves occur through action taken by Arctic people themselves, as in the examples of court cases before the ECJ or Inuit and Athabascan petitions, or through their official representation in international fora, such as the IWC via, for example, the Danish representation.