The motivation for this stance is to subtly establish de facto power in anticipation of future economic and (to follow the (neo)realist line of thought) territorial gains and any potential disputes over them. The Arctic can thus be portrayed as a set of actors, interacting in ways that demonstrate different, more integrated ways of undertaking international dialogue and politics.One illustration of integration is the establishing of (some 'unlikely') state partnerships and non-state actors being brought to the institutional 'Arctic Council table' as equals. The Arctic Council table is supposed to take a lead position in enabling its members to cooperate and shape policy-making.Does this point to Arcticness as a new, more cooperative, inclusive and peaceful approach to international politics, be it based on tactics or even on previous international political lessons?

To some degree, this seems to be the case, considering the 'unparalleled level of indigenous political engagement' in high-level politics.Moreover, there are collective historical memories of a challenged and divided Arctic region, 39 most recently by the Cold War-an issue which to some extent still exists due to ongoing NATO divisions. Such memories of division provide a powerful impetus for public narratives to emphasise the necessity of peaceful cooperation for the secure governance of this environmentally harsh region. This is especially true when much international relations history and literature point to the region's potential for conflict.However, this narration of space, be it by outsiders, economic actors or states, may have exerted significant influence on states' foreign policies as a visibly more cooperative approach has been developed since the 1990s aided by the institutionalisation of cooperation on non-military matters through the creation of the Arctic Council in 1996.While Arctic states portray peaceful cooperation as part of their Arcticness, the atmosphere seems to change when non-regional Asian and European middle powers, China, or the European Union (EU) as a soft or smart power, express a wish to join the Arctic club.Ironically, these non-regional nations construct and 'sell' their own Arcticness and, thus, their legitimacy to the 'Arctic pie' as a global common.Those who have successfully wooed the Arctic Council are now acting as observers in cross-cutting middle power diplomacy. They are 'bridging public diplomacy' and creating niche alliances on many specific subjects, environmental issues and so-called 'green growth'. But they are also entering some traditional domains of big power politics in order to exert their influence on Arctic agenda setting.A focus is thereby put on soft areas of technical win-win situations (i.e. ship-building technologies, investments in Panamax ports, cooperation on expensive scientific projects and environmental technologies), demonstrating 'southern solidarity', reiterating shared experiences 45 or any issue which is regarded as essential to the Arctic. In this forum, the EU is something of a special player. Its desire to be involved is not only motivated by Brussels' energy and environmental concerns but also by the geographical position of its northern member states within the Arctic.As alluded to above, these outsider efforts are often met by the Arctic club with some nervousness and the use of stalling tactics. This has been demonstrated most recently by the 2015 deferment of allowing the EU observer status on the Arctic Council. The continued mistrust and reluctance of Arctic countries to fully include non-Arctic states points to some elemental characteristics of what Arcticness means to the Arctic nations. Namely, it is not just a static identity-politics but it also involves region-building 47 via the social exercise of 'zoning' the Arctic as a distinct space with respect to other states and regions.At the same time, the Arctic nations are asserting their own belonging to this socially constructed 'imagined community' 49 in relation to the external 'other'. The external other in this case can mean both positioning oneself 'with the other' as is currently the case vis-à-vis those nations' Arctic 'hinterland' or other regional states, and positioning oneself 'versus the other' as is happening vis-à-vis non-Arctic players. Interestingly though, efforts among Arctic states to establish their Arcticness based on some common features of regional belonging are almost immediately followed by an emphasis on the differences between them. This lends a unique colour to their individual Arctic claims for legitimacy to be part of their own club.

Establishing one's Arcticness, therefore, is built partially, but powerfully, by utilising the notion of a margin as a tool or considering the dichotomy between centre and margin, with which to side or which to block to naturalise these social constructions until they become accepted as reality. Hence, Arcticness means an exclusive club of states deciding who to include and cooperate with and who is not worthy or trustworthy enough to be granted this status. By the same logic, non-Arctic players construct an Arcticness in their national identity narratives that rationalises their envisioned involvement in the Arctic arena through non-traditional justifications that deviate from ethnic nationalism and traditional power politics. In short, sub-Arctic actors assert their status as 'Arctic stakeholders with real rather than imagined stakes'.