8 Energy justice: A new framework for examining Arcticness in the context of energy infrastructure development

We propose the application of an emerging research agenda in 'energy justice' to consider Arcticness in the context of energy exploration in the Arctic region. We define Arcticness as a process (rather than a state of being) of bringing voice to those affected by change in the Arctic. It is important not to objectify Arcticness as this will lead inevitably to exclusion. We should instead subjectify in the context of past, present and future changing trajectories-a changing process. We therefore need frameworks for exploring and indeed promoting this changing process of 'Arctic voice'. Energy justice is a framework that is able to contribute to this process. The context of change in this chapter is not the climate, but rather energy exploration. Almost a third of the world's undiscovered gas and 13 per cent of the world's undiscovered oil may be found there, mostly offshore under less than 500 meters of water. 1 In an age of resource depletion, researchers need to pay greater attention to justice concerns in energy policy. In particular, energy exploration-and the resulting energy infrastructure that is built in the Arctic and across the world as a result of the energy resources being extracted-is a major concern for the world. This is even more important when considering the knowledge the global research community published in 2016 and highlighted: (1) temperatures in the Arctic are running at 20°C higher than normal at this time of year; 2 and (2) because of the high temperatures there will be A rC t I C n e ss L I v I n G 78 19 'tipping points' in the Arctic region that will suffer severe consequences and there will be direct effects felt by many countries around the globe. 3 Energy justice provides a framework for assessing the justice implications-or simply the injustices-of current policy decisions as well as making practical recommendations. In this chapter we identify some key injustices and recommendations with regards to uncovering Arcticness. We finish with a call for research into 'frames of injustice' beyond those currently promoted by existing energy justice scholarship.



UCL Department of Geography

Like a teacher's red pen, the jagged line underneath my writing gave me an uneasy feeling. I tried to ignore it, but the overly conscientious primary school pupil in me would not let it rest: The word processor indicates a spelling error; it's unacceptable to continue, my own internal voice nagged.

'Arcticness' is a term, though; and a highly useful one-as I told my word processor with the click of the mouse, 'Add to Dictionary'. Adding the suffix '-ness' denotes a state or quality-in this case, the quality of being Arctic.

For those of us interested in the Arctic and, in particular, how people relate to it, a word for the 'quality of being Arctic' is a potential cause for agonisingly many jagged red lines. Although my software clearly disagreed, I am, of course, not the first to see the need for it-something to which this book bears testament. As the world is increasingly looking northwards to a region undergoing rapid change, identifying what, who or where has the 'quality of being Arctic' is high on the agenda; for actors from both near and far, their 'Arcticness' becomes a potential asset as they position themselves for Arctic futures.

But what does it really mean, 'Arcticness'; what are Arctic 'qualities'? Unlike placating a spell-checker, defining what 'is' Arctic (or feeling, believing, thinking, imagining that someone/ something/ somewhere is) is not as straightforward as it may seem. The region itself is defined in numerous ways depending on topic, context and even interest; and so, determining the qualities of a region that cannot itself be fully determined provides a challenge.

Given that claiming an Arctic identity may serve an instrumental purpose-for example adding to political actors' or private stakeholders' credibility-the ambiguity of Arcticness is also in part why the concept is so fascinating, not to mention so important to explore. In relations between the Arctic and non-Arctic, the claim to Arcticness potentially becomes a political one; indeed, it may decide who falls on either side of Arctic and the prefixed 'non-'. In turn, Arcticness becomes a question of who holds rights, who holds responsibilities, and who holds 'true' knowledge of a space in rapid flux  Arcticness does not only matter for political decisions and resource extraction; it seems to have become exotic, interesting-it sells. With northern lights tours and midnight sun cruises, Arcticness is increasingly commodified. With 'Arctic' labels on anything from bottled drinks to cleaning companies, it has become a brand so ubiquitous that it is now simply part of the everyday.

This has not always been the case. Having grown up in Northern Norway, the change is clear-not just climatic or economic change in the region, but a change of label. What was only a decade ago Northern Norway is now frequently referred to as 'the High North' [' nordområdene' in Norwegian, translating literally as 'the northern areas'] or the Arctic. A northern identity may now be an Arctic identity-just like our tap water is now 'Arctic water'.

Rebranding the north as 'Arctic' is not for those in the Arctic, however, but rather for the outside spectator-tourist, visitor, investor or politician. Speaking of what is Arctic or not, who is Arctic or not, is hardly consequential when you are there-it is simply less relevant, less interesting, less exotic. Nevertheless, it is primarily northern communities who face the challenging consequences as the 'frozen' Arctic thaws. What is important to remember here is that these communities have never themselves been 'frozen' (in time), but have always been evolving, moving, changing. Saying that voices from the Arctic are important is not enough-they must also be listened to, and finally, engaged in conversation. That is, voices (and ears!) from north and south, east and west, are all important in this process of change. Just like a 'new' label, an identification as or with something comes about through negation; and so, Arcticness too takes on meaning through relations and encounters with the constitutive other.

Perhaps then this is more than simply an exercise of marketing or rhetoric; perhaps our concept of 'Arcticness' itself is undergoing change? Could it be that a region which has historically been seen as far away-peripheral to the centre of society-is now being 'drawn closer' due to its accelerating importance to questions of climate change and globalisation?

Interrogating why something is now considered 'Arctic' is highly important; as is attention to who claims so, or who is now themselves considered Arctic: these are questions of power-as noted, power both xiii List of figures

Tun Jan (TJ) Young is a PhD Student in Polar Studies at the University of Cambridge. His research integrates electrical engineering, numerical modelling and field glaciology to investigate the basal and englacial regimes of the Greenland Ice Sheet.