The uncertainty regarding whether industrial development related to oil and gas exploration and extraction will take place in the future and the potential for social change if commercial finds are made place the people living in the Upernavik area in a situation of uncertainty. In the following section, we describe how the exploration activities were perceived at the time, and how the locals coped with the uncertainty.

Local populations and livelihoods

Upernavik District covers 448 km of coastline in North West Greenland. The area includes the town of Upernavik with about 1,100 residents and nine smaller settlements with populations of about 1,700. The inhabitants are, as in most communities in Greenland, predominantly Inuit by ethnicity. The main occupation in the area is hunting and fishing, which is practised both as a commercial and a recreational activity. Families travel to traditional or communally shared hunting, fishing and gathering places along the coast, inlets and smaller islands.Hunting quotas in Greenland regulate the hunting of selected species, but, while some species, such as seal or Arctic cod remain abundant, other animals, such as narwhals and belugas, remain subject to government regulations.Whale quotas are set by Naalakkersuisut annually and subsequently distributed to local districts where the municipal authorities decide on the allocation of commercial and leisure hunting licences.Other hunted species include seabirds, walruses, seals and polar bears.Commercial and subsistence fishing, as well as the hunting activities are considered important supplements to the economy for many households.Local expectations

In 2012 and 2013, when the licence-holding companies were gathering seismic data to map geological features of the sub-surface, a number of public consultations were undertaken and meetings took place between the people of Upernavik District and company representatives.According to the interviews that we subsequently held with people in Upernavik District, they were very aware of the activity and the presence of oil companies and their plans. They did not, however, distinguish between individual companies but rather perceived the industry as 'one' entity. They did not seem very affected by the ongoing activities and in general they expressed relatively little interest in the industry. They did, however, express concerns regarding the potential influence of the activities on their (whale or fish) catch and were also curious to hear more about what kinds of industrial activities were going to take place. They were also curious to hear more from the companies about opportunities to work for or in the industry.

A representative of the municipal office in Upernavik provided the following explanation for why people were interested: 'The word "oil" has been mentioned many times, so there is a general feeling of understanding of oil being important, but the real physical understanding of what oil exploration is and what it means is not clear to people.' 25 Some of the young men in the area expressed an interest in potentially supplementing the income of their hunting activities with jobs in the oil industry in order to support the life they already lived. They expressed a generally positive attitude towards the oil industry, which they saw as a potential facilitator of some of the changes needed locally to uphold their desired way of living in close connection with the land.

There were no high hopes in relation to the activities, but rather a curiosity and an interest from the locals. There were, however, great expectations in Nuuk among the government officials and politicians at the national level. It is also worth noting that expectations were much higher in relation to mining developments and the proposed construction of an aluminium smelter in the southern regions of Greenland, perhaps because these activities are taking place onshore and potentially have a much more direct impact on local livelihoods.Reflections on the Upernavik case study

In Upernavik, the attitude of the locals and the pragmatic reaction to potential development could be seen as characteristically 'Arctic'. The people of Upernavik were not very influenced by the 'hype' of the potential oil developments. They focused on what was known (birds in the hand and not in the bush) and held on to the importance of traditional activities, rather than dreaming about the future. In a similar way, the Inuit living in the small communities on Alaska's North Slope after 40 years of oil production still have a primary focus on traditional activities rather than on the potential for working in industry or changing or modernising their communities. This also means that local benefits in the Arctic are not necessarily obtained through skills training or the creation of job opportunities in the extractive industry itself (as has been the case in other parts of the world). Stronger and more sustainable communities are achieved instead by securing healthy living standards for people by providing the necessary infrastructure (housing, clean water, transport and supplies), and definitely not from paying out dividend cheques.

Murmansk, Russia

The Shtokman gas field, located in the Barents Sea some 600 km north of the shores of the Kola Peninsula, is one of the world's largest natural gas fields. Development of the field had been discussed in earnest since the mid-1990s. Anticipation on both sides of the Norwegian/ Russian border reached fever pitch around and after 2005, when cooperation agreements to develop this field were signed by Russia, Norway and France, with Gazprom at the forefront. This triggered an avalanche of bids for field development