there are strong indications that simply providing the option to move allows cooperation to persist for a long period of time.It is difficult to see how such a flexible system of group formation can be upheld in a system with privatised and/ or fenced grazing areas that cut across former cooperative groups. Similarly, if group membership becomes consolidated through the legal system-as is the plan in Norwaytransferring to another siida might become difficult for individual herders. In short, positive assortment, facilitating cooperation, might be limited with land tenure privatisation.

In addition, it has been claimed that privatisation has resulted in increasing levels of conflict and created the potential for new disputes, because fuzzy boundaries are open for negotiation while fencing in rangelands precludes negotiation. 92 Moreover, privatisation seems to have changed the nature of conflicts: previously conflicts occurred primarily between groups, now conflicts occur between individual (former) group membersand also between family members (usually brothers) and neighbouring households. 94 In short, formerly cooperative relationships may have been transformed into competitive relationships.Privatisation has also resulted in increasing differences between poor and rich herders: For example, in Inner Mongolia in the 1980s those with the means to enclose land did so-effectively a first-use principle for those with most power. This intensified economic exploitation and encouraged more irregular grazing practices.Powerful and rich herders therefore enjoyed a tremendous advantage in the local competition for present and future grassland resources; some have enclosed far more than their allotted share.Concluding remarks and future prospects

While discussing the significance of place in the construction of anthropological theory, Appadurai 98 makes a number of observations relevant for this volume's focus on Arcticness. Appadurai 99 notes that there is a tendency for places to become showcases for specific issues over time and thus might restrict theoretical discussions locally as well as exclude other relevant issues. Appadurai cautions us to ask: whether these gatekeeping concepts, these theoretical metonyms, really reflect something significant about the place in question, or whether they reveal a relatively arbitrary imposition of the whims of [anthropological] fashion on particular places (p. 358).Arcticness as a 'quality of being Arctic'-as Medby writes in the preface of this book-has the potential to become a theoretical construct linked to a specific place, that is, the Arctic, that excludes other lines of inquiry.

It also has an explicit ontological connotation: while anthropology has had a long tradition of documenting different ideas of what 'is' and how to 'be', it has always been firmly rooted in the idea of a common humanity shared by all people in all cultures.Currently, however, the ontological turn posits a move from different worldviews to different worlds altogether; from reality to realities; from variations of how to be human to emphasising incommensurable differences.It is therefore important to critically investigate what exactly Arcticness denotes. Do we take it to mean ideas about being in the Arctic, for example Arctic worldviews? Or are we positing the Arctic as an ontological distinct lifeworld where the quality of being Arctic unfolds? If the former, then Arcticness becomes an unnecessary theoretical construct that we do not really need. If the latter, then we might reinstate the Arctic and the people who live there as the significant 'Other', fundamentally different. In other words, Arcticness might become a concept of exotification where we reify what it means to live and be in the Arctic. Because by adding-'ness' to the word Arctic, we seem to point to something qualitatively essential, immutable and unchanging with being (and living) in the Arctic, while in fact-as Medby points out in the preface-the Arctic is undergoing rapid changes on several fronts.

As shown here, a comparative approach is fruitful for understanding challenges facing reindeer herders in the Arctic parts of Norway. It might not tell us much about the 'quality of being Arctic' (or, in fact, it might not tell us anything about 'the quality of being a reindeer herder in the Arctic', which to me makes more sense, since it does not have the connotation of 'being a place'), but comparative evidence indicates that privatisation might result in a corollary of unintended consequences for reindeer herders: (1) reduced mobility and increased degradation; (2) increased conflicts and/ or the development of social hierarchies; (3) a negative impact on efficient cooperation.

Concurrent with land tenure changes that reduce pastoralists' ability to respond to environmental variability by moving away from affected areas, environmental variability has increased during the last few decades and is predicted to increase further in the future due to climate change.As for the Arctic and sub-Arctic, scenarios generated by most climate models predict that the climate is likely to become increasingly unstable during the next half century with concomitant increases in the frequency of extreme weather conditions.A case has been made that pastoralists are in a unique position to tackle climate change due to extensive experience managing environmental variability in marginal areasand it has been argued that the ability to withstand environmental shocks is a defining feature of pastoralism.