While the African Union does have the ability to make binding decisions, for example, through its Peace and Security Council to impose sanctions and deploy peace-keeping forces, it is likely to use soft rules and norms to facilitate extractives-led growth across the continent.

In East Africa the rhetoric of resource-led development has largely been adopted by countries with significant hydrocarbon deposits. In Uganda expectations of the benefits are extremely high: the Government of Uganda's Vision 2040 to transform Ugandan society 'from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years' are largely predicated on revenues from oil and gas.While the integration of oil and gas infrastructure has been discussed at the level of the East African Community, cooperation remains elusive as countries compete aggressively for foreign direct investment and oil infrastructure projects.

For example, Kenya and Tanzania sought to win over Uganda as the preferred pipeline route to ports on the Indian Ocean. The Kenyan route seemed most likely for years, until Uganda was swayed in 2016 to partner with Tanzania due to security, economic and land acquisition concerns along the northern route.Thus governance of oil and gas development at the regional level remains mired in zero sum politics between nation states.Domestically, Uganda's oil and gas legal framework has been influenced by international norms and standards but there are concerns about loopholes and implementation deficits. For example, Uganda's 2008 National Oil and Gas Policy was influenced by international norms on transparency, such as the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). Although Uganda has not adopted the EITI, the policy conforms to international best practice on stressing the importance of transparency and accountability in all aspects of natural resource management.In order to put the 2008 National Oil and Gas Policy into practice, the Government of Uganda has established its legal framework for petroleum: the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act 2013; the Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion Transportation and Storage) Act 2013; and the Public Finance Act 2015. While Uganda's legal framework is seen as a positive step towards transparency and accountability throughout the value chain of the sector, there are a variety of concerns, including: the centralisation of power in the executive branch of government; loopholes in the Public Finance Act that may fall short of EITI requirements; and the National Environment Management Authority's lack of capacity to monitor and regulate the environmental impacts of oil activities.The promise of future oil revenues will most likely reduce Uganda's reliance upon donor budget support, but may have negative impacts on governance, as one political analyst observed in 2006: 'But of course, depending on how commercial the oil is, his [Museveni's] foreign policy will change. He will no longer need donor money to buy political support'.

As Oran Young notes, romantic notions of the Arctic have traditionally represented 'human life in the Arctic that casts the indigenous peoples of the Circumpolar North as happy hunter/ gatherers living a simple existence in harmony with the natural environment and uncorrupted by the forces of modernity'.Intuitively, this romanticised view would suggest a reluctance of many Greenlandic people to embrace oil development as it would clash with their traditional lifestyles, from fears over impacts on whaling migration and oil spillage to the social upheaval involved in large-scale industrialisation. In reality, indigenous lifestyles and identity in the contemporary Arctic are considerably more nuanced. This is especially so for Greenland, which serves as an example of indigenous self-government, 70 a situation rare for many of the world's indigenous populations.

Research exploring local community opinion around oil development in Greenland shows a spectrum of perspectives, ranging from those who strongly support the development, those undecided or uncertain, to those vehemently opposed.Those who side more favourably with development tend to cite the important economic benefits that would arise from such large-scale industrial activity and the positive impacts this would have on employment, educational opportunities and healthcare. Those opposed often point to the environmental damage such activity would inflict, both locally and globally, as well as social concerns such as the democratic implications of a small nation becoming dependent on large oil companies and the societal implications of the immigration of foreign workers.While issues on how oil development impacts indigenous communities and lifestyles are evident and are of importance, 73 they are not necessarily as pronounced as images of Arcticness might suggest. To take one example, research with inhabitants of the town of Aasiaat, a community that served as the base of oil exploration in 2010, found a complex picture regarding the relationship between traditional livelihoods and oil development.For some, traditional livelihoods no longer really existed or were already disappearing, the modern reality being that the majority of Greenlanders now live in towns. Others pointed towards the ability of traditional culture to adapt to changing societal pressures as a fundamental part of the Inuit identity, that is not a fixed position but is malleable to change.

While community concerns found around oil development in Greenland may resemble other areas of oil development, there are differences. In Uganda, the general public, media and civil society appear to largely support the pro-oil resource-led development rhetoric of the national government, that oil should be used to propel the country into middle-income status over the next 30 years. The national debate is around good governance of the resource as opposed to whether or not it should be extracted. At the local level, communities in the Bunyoro region along Lake Albert are comprised of peasant small holders largely reliant upon subsistence agriculture and fishing. The villages where oil exploration has taken place have had significant interaction with oil companies and their contractors. This interaction has led to some casual labour and corporate social responsibility and social investment projects in the areas of health, water, sanitation, education, road infrastructure and local economic development among others. Expectations of local benefits are high, particularly in the area of local employment, infrastructure development and social amenities. However, there are concerns in Uganda's oil bearing communities about lack of information, stakeholder engagement, local employment, livelihood and environmental impacts among other things. 75 These issues are significant, but are not unique to Uganda.