In Uganda, commercially viable oil was discovered in 2006 with recoverable reserves estimated to be at least 1.4 billion barrels of crude with proven reserves of 6 billion barrels. However, given these technical challenges and associated political and economic concerns, progress towards commercial production has been slow in Uganda with the first oil projected for 2020. Indeed, US$50/ barrel is needed to make oil production economically feasible in Uganda. For Greenland, the per barrel cost required for economic viability is significantly higher given the expensive production costs involved with working in remote, polar waters and a limited drilling window confined to the summer months.With the crude oil prices dropping as low as US$30/ barrel in January 2016, the prospects for offshore oil development in Greenland look increasingly unlikely in the short-term.Broadly-speaking, there are certainly similarities between the material challenges facing each resource frontier; for example, limited oil infrastructure, economic viability, technological challenges and the potential for socio-environmental impacts. These similarities are, however, unsurprising as such characteristics are usually common to resource frontiers.The very fact that they are frontiers signals limited infrastructure in relation to the resource being developed. Questions over economic viability are always present in such contexts: if it were not so, it is likely the resource would have been developed earlier. Technological challenges are often an obstacle that has previously prevented resource development; likewise are the potential risks associated with negative socio-environmental impacts.

One aspect of Arcticness then is the extremity of these material challenges for Greenland. The sparse population of Greenland, the remoteness of its seas, the harsh, polar environment and the vulnerability of ecosystems that are crucial for Arctic peoples' livelihoods are all factors contributing to this extremity. These are, also, characteristics commonly associated with traditionally romanticised imaginaries of Arcticness: a remote wilderness to be explored that challenges human endeavour (and its technological ingenuity) to the utmost.Much in common with the Arctic explorers of the past, there is an aspect of discussing oil company exploration in Greenland that sounds like explorers entering a remote, challenging corner of the globe. On the other hand, geologists have known about the presence of oil in Uganda's Albertine Graben since the 1920s, with the first exploration well drilled in 1938.It was not until the commodity super cycle of the 2000s and the rise in oil prices that exploration into the region was reinvigorated and commercial quantities of oil discovered. Thus a key distinction between Uganda and Greenland is the extremity of oil development in Arctic waters.

Global interest

The Arctic is a region of significant global interest. It is often framed as a region opening up to stakeholders worldwide and home to a new geography of voices.As such, what takes place in the Arctic is of increasing global concern and can often lead to the Arctic resembling a 'global commons', especially given the context of its ocean and climate change. The East African context has interesting parallels.

Two prominent reasons contribute to the perception of the Arctic Ocean as a global commons. First, there is a conflation with the situation found in the Arctic's polar relation in the south, Antarctica. While sharing many cryospheric characteristics due to their polar latitudes, there are certain factors that ultimately define them as fundamentally different international spaces.Crucially, Antarctica is an uninhabited landmass surrounded by ocean. This lends itself more readily to the perception of an international space or global commons. While it is too simplistic to label Antarctica purely as an 'international space', international agreements such as the Antarctica Treaty embody this perception.In contrast, the Arctic is an ocean surrounded by inhabited landmasses. However, in terms of remoteness and lack of inhabitants, the (varying) ice cover at its ocean's centre resembles a polar wilderness akin to Antarctica. It is often these imaginaries of the upper Arctic Ocean that are evoked when the Arctic Ocean is described as a 'global commons'.The ambiguity of the Arctic Ocean 41 facilitates this global perception of the region.

In a Greenlandic context, where oil and gas development is offshore but takes place in sovereign waters, there is a blurring with the high seas of the Arctic Ocean that accentuates a greater legitimisation of 'outsider concern'; for example globally-focused environmental campaigns such as Greenpeace's 'Save the Arctic' around Arctic offshore oil and gas.While the African context is obviously very different, there is still significant global interest in the region. On the one hand, there is often heavy involvement by donors and international NGOs among others keen to assist least developed country governments, such as Uganda, to utilise natural resource rents for pro-poor development (as will be discussed below in the governance section). On the other hand, the general public and media in Western countries make the mistake of homogenising the African continent as one country in dire need of charity and overseas development assistance based upon negative post-colonial narratives of war, disease, poverty, corruption and starvation.The Arctic's tightly woven relationship with climate change ensures global interest in Greenland's oil adventure. Much is written about the impact of climate change on the Arctic, where the impacts are felt more keenly than anywhere else.