Therefore, greater involvement of local populations and attention to their knowledge of the region is needed to direct touristic flows. This allows the generation of additional income by offering authentic experiences, while preserving local ecosystems and habitat.

In this context, it is important to consider how extractive industries and other activities potentially impact upon the means of action of local peoples. One dimension is improving general levels of human security. Revenue streams from commercial activities could potentially benefit the security aspect of freedom from want-the provision of an adequate standard of living. In fulfilling this approach, we need to fully appreciate that indigenous groups significantly differ in their histories, and thus in their present needs as well as their visions for the future. Therefore, it is important that different local groups are considered individually within their contexts rather than being seen as all coming from the Arctic region. Thus, the mere engagement of the Arctic community into planning and decision making as an attempt for procedural justice is insufficient. Regional differences across Arctic communities must be respected and taken into consideration.

Beyond indigenous peoples, academic scholars can equally be identified as under-or mis-recognised. A call for the recognition of northern scholars in the identification of research priorities in Arctic areas is also needed. The focus has to be redirected towards the co-production and co-communication of research results between science and stakeholders. Next to a better integration of natural and social science in the Arctic, advancing recognition-based justice would be achieved if research results were presented in a way which is easy for non-scientific audiences to understand. Part of recognition justice is the informed self-determination of future development pathways that communities choose for themselves, despite adherence to traditional social and economic activities.

Expanding justice in Arcticness-a new role for the non-human

One particular debate on Arcticness deserves particular attention in this study, namely whether the natural environment can be considered a separate voice. The energy justice framework continues to suffer from a uniquely anthropological outlook. Arctic-based ecosystems and habitats are at the forefront of energy developments in the region. If their full implications are to be considered, energy justice must be more than a means to 'providall individuals, across all areas, with safe, affordable and sustainable energy'.Protection of the environment should have equal status. One avenue suggests that changing reporting procedures for companies, as the primary agent in a largely unregulated area, may provide some modest hope.

Procedural justice refers largely to human populations, with an overconcentration on impacts upon local communities. We of course agree with Marshall and Brown that 'the question of whether to report on the environment is no longer an issue'.But rather than reporting to stakeholders on environmental impacts, we question here whether the environment itself should be considered to be a stakeholder. It is essential that we find new ways to bring the environment into this debate on justice and security in Arctic energy development.

The main controversy in relation to the environment is connected with its non-human nature. Indeed, the environment cannot physically engage in dialogue with developers or articulate its interests and concerns. However, there is no denying that the environment is affected by organisational activities, and the organisation likewise can be affected by the environment. This is particularly relevant to Arctic oil and gas companies as resource extraction can cause extreme environmental damage, for example oil spills from an operational accident, and can easily be disrupted by the extreme weather conditions which are typical of this region.

The definition of a stakeholder, namely 'any group or individual who can affect or is affected by the achievement of the organisation's objectives', 28 does not explicitly specify whether stakeholding is only applicable to people. Technically, there is no reason not to consider the natural environment as a stakeholder just because it cannot speak. Starik compares the non-human environment to the groups that were historically discriminated against and hence deprived of a political voice: slaves, indigenous minorities, the homeless and political prisoners.He argues that, despite not having such a voice, these groups would still be considered as stakeholders, so why should the environment not also receive stakeholder status? The question remains as to what the practical implications of such recognition could be.

The environment can also be viewed as a stakeholder due to its importance to the interests of future generations with regards to both human and non-humans. This argument is of particular relevance to the Arcticness debate as oil and gas extraction in this region is likely to increase the speed of the already melting Arctic ice, which will affect the ecological balance by accelerating the process of global warming. Social scientists need to engage with natural scientists in order to theorise how energy developments can be just to both human and non-human.

Implications: energy justice and 'frames' of Arcticness

Injustice-rather than justice-should be the focal point for energy justice research through a more explicit assessment of master frames of 'injustice' in the pursuit of understanding Arcticness. Master frames are collective action frames of Arctic stakeholders that have expanded in scope and influence. Put simply, a master frame encompasses the contextual boundaries, interaction and normative claims of more than one organisation, one movement or one voice. Such frames can indeed vary dramatically in terms of restrictiveness or exclusion. Gerhard and Rucht found that two distinct master frames (with different protagonists, antagonists, organisations, etc.) worked together to encourage social mobilisation in Germany.