1). The ice blocks are called floes and the cracks are called leads. The difference in height between these two surfaces is known as the sea ice freeboard-the elevation of the sea ice above the ocean surface. A buoyancy calculation can then be applied to estimate the thickness of the ice below the waterline, which is called the sea ice draft. Combining the freeboard and draft gives the total ice thickness. Sea ice volume is simply the ice thickness multiplied by area.

Airborne radar

Compared to satellite radar observations, measurements of Arctic snow and ice conducted through airborne radar missions produce images at a much higher spatial resolution but at the cost of a smaller footprint.This can be beneficial in studies within single glacial catchments, for instance, to investigate local topography and how the shape of the terrain influences the flow and deformation of the ice above. This is a key parameter in models predicting loss of land ice and sea-level rise.

The majority of airborne radar is 'side-looking', whereby antennas are carried underneath the aircraft body or wings and are fixed to look at right angles to the aircraft's trajectory.Continuous scanning while the aircraft is moving produces images that overlap in space, which can then be stitched together to create a composite swathe of the study area in question.

Much side-looking radar takes advantage of the moving platform by using one antenna in time-multiplex, which creates a synthetic antenna aperture consisting of the same antenna receiving echoes in a lengthwise array. This technique allows Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) to produce images with extremely high (millimetre) resolution, which differentiates it from other traditional airborne radar.Normally, the output image resolution is scaled with the size of the antenna aperture-this is analogous to using larger telescopes to explore regions of outer space. Therefore, SAR is a convenient way to obtain measurements with a spatial resolution at millimetre accuracy, which would otherwise require an impractically large (greater than 10 m) antenna array.

A noteworthy dataset obtained from airborne radar are the observations from NASA's Operation IceBridgean eight-year-long mission of the largest airborne survey of the Earth's Polar Regions. The objective of the mission is to bridge the gap in polar observations between the unexpected degradation of ICESat's Geoscience Laser Altimeter System (GLAS) in October 2009 and the planned launch of the replacement ICESat-2 in late-2018.IceBridge is a vital component that ensures a 20-year continuous record with the advent of ICESat in 2003 and the estimated design life of ICESat-2 ending in 2022.IceBridge operates using a number of research aircraft that are equipped with radars, laser altimeters, photographic mapping systems and tools to measure surface gravity and magnetic properties.

Ground-based radar

Radio echo sounding (RES), another form of radar, functions by transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves at specific frequencies or frequency bands in order to investigate the properties of ice.The propagation of radio waves through ice is principally controlled by the permittivity and conductivity of the ice material. The contrast between these properties and other materials, such as water and sediments, causes a proportion of the radio waves to be transmitted through the ice to reflect back to the radar receiver on the surface. This delay and a (multiple) reflection mechanism allow the ice base and layers within the ice mass to be observed non-invasively by appropriate processing of the received radar signal. In the late 1990s, interests in ground-based sounders, in particular phase-sensitive radars (also known as pRES), began to re-emerge at the British Antarctic Surveyafter their initial popularity in the 1960s (see earlier). Such systems have many advantages over mobile platforms. For instance, a stationary system can acquire many radar datasets that can be coherently averaged to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. This will then help to reveal the weak internal reflectors within the ice column. It also makes it possible to use a low transmit power, often three orders of magnitude lower than airborne systems. Another popular application of ground-based radar is to profile ice sheets along transects.Recent advances have been made in a new phase-sensitive radar based on frequency modulated continuous wave (FMCW) techniques for glaciological applications.A version of this radar has also been configured with an array of antennas to form an experimental system that allows imaging through the ice.A block diagram of a typical ice monitoring radar system is shown in

Scientific examples of Arctic ice observations satellite observations of Arctic sea ice thickness

Satellite radar altimetry can be used to measure Arctic sea ice thickness, as discussed in the previous section. When combined with estimates of the sea ice edge from a satellite technique known as passive microwave,Arctic-wide maps of sea ice thickness can be produced (e.g.3). This has only been possible since the launch of the CryoSat-2 radar altimeter satellite, which provides unparalleled coverage of the Polar Regions.

Airborne radar

Since its launch in 2010, Operation IceBridge has been valuable to the scientific community because it has secured long-term measurements of important study areas and has provided key data to serve research goals. By producing yearly measurements over land and sea ice, it has aided research in snow and firn studies,