Arcticness I have, even though I live far from Alaska, and makes me feel connected to my Aunt Peg. I have started selling the art, like she did. It makes me happy to see my spiritual connection to the Arctic make others excited and happy. I feel they are spreading Arcticness to each person they meet as they share my beading.

I enjoy giving away my art to family and friends. I feel a connection with each person who wears my art. The time I put into the piece, the spiritual connection to being Iñupiaq, and working in the memory of my Aunt makes every piece I produce special and unique. My beading spreads the beauty of Arctic lifeways and artistic patterns across the world.

3 Conversations in the Dark

Larissa Diakiw (publishing as frankie no one)

Conversations in the Dark is the first in a series of graphic essays that follows Frankie as she explores history. In this comic she reads the food chapter in Canada's Truth and Reconciliation Commission, a report that details the abuses that took place under the residential school programme.

Tracking the Arctic

Wrenched white vista winds Knead them black, turn it around Tracks were stretching south

Funsho Martin Parrott

Tracking the Arctic funsho Martin Parrott

Haiku is a Japanese poem of 17 syllables, in 3 lines of 5, 7 and 5. Haiku traditionally evokes images of the natural world. The purpose of Haiku is to create a poetic form which has the brevity and intensity of the moment. The rigour of Haiku ensures that only the most essential parts of an idea or moment remain.

The theme of this Haiku is irreparable change and crossing a point of no return. The first line speaks about the damaged landscape, with the repetition of 'W' representing the ice caps and glaciers of northern terrains. The second line seeks to illustrate the unforgiving nature of the Arctic climate with the 'Knead'. 'Knead' is a double entendre. If read as 'need', the line becomes about our insatiable need for 'black' or oil, while 'knead' describes the forceful folding and distorting one can experience within Arctic winds. The last line also has a double meaning. It speaks about the footprints that Arctic wildlife would have left in the ice and snow, had it not been for the damage to their habitats; hence, their description in the past tense. It also references the work of Arctic organisations and places it alongside the art of tracking, a skill belonging to many First Nations people. They track within the Arctic; we track the Arctic itself.

To many observers, the Arctic is synonymous with snow and ice. For example, the Arctic Ocean spans just over 14 million km 2-an area larger than that of Europe-which is variably covered in frozen ocean water, or sea ice, throughout the year.The Arctic Ocean is almost completely surrounded by land, which can often be covered in snow, permafrost (frozen soil, rock or sediment) or land ice. Observing how different forms of ice in the Arctic are changing, and understanding how they have evolved in the past, is crucial. Radar technology provides us with a tool to do this and allows us to visualise the glacial environment beneath the ice surface. This chapter provides an overview of modern radar-based observation methods and describes how measurements from them have contributed to a scientific understanding of ice with an emphasis on Arcticness.

Over the past few decades, radar technology has significantly contributed to our understanding of the Arctic landscape. It has become a key tool in observing changes in the Arctic snow and ice cover. For example, data from radar satellites have been used to document changes in the thickness of the sea ice that covers the Arctic Ocean, by measuring the elevation of the ice and ocean surfaces separately. These data are now available in near real time (NRT) and will allow us to assess Arctic environmental change as it is happening. They also have the potential to help industries such as tourism and transport to navigate the polar oceans with safety and care. Radar-based measurements can be used to constrain the physics of ice flow within models that predict the future state of Arctic ice and global climate.

By using a growing suite of satellite, airborne and ground-based radar data, scientists are able to study the past Arctic climate, provide information on the present state of the Arctic and aid future predictions of Arctic climate change. Communicating such Arctic science-to other scientists, the media and the public-and integrating the physical sciences and engineering with Arctic action on the ground raises further challenges which need to be overcome to deal with Arctic change. As scientists, it is this ever-changing, physical landscape that on first thought embodies the concept of 'Arcticness', and the ability to use scientific tools to observe and quantify these changes. On reflection, this is a rather remote and emotionless connection-like the connection between a scientific instrument and the landscape it observes.

One must consider Arcticness internally and not just externally, to truly feel a connection to it, and realise that the Arctic is so much more than a distant land to be studied from afar. The Arctic is livelihood; it is support despite a lack of physical contact; it is passion and excitement; and it is the draw of the supposed unknown. Never does that become clearer than when standing on the ice and experiencing overwhelming silence interspersed with deafening creaks and groans. No science can describe the feeling of isolation and exhaustion, which is far outweighed by sheer euphoria and awe.