This has been more successfully utilised as a mobilisation tool for activists in the USA,with some notable exceptions with regards to the protection of indigenous peoples across the Americas 6 or in Taiwan 7 or tribal groups facing environmental hazards in Africa. 8 Through initial explorations of distributive and subequently procedural justice concerns, environmental justice scholars have 'examined multiple reasons for the construction of injustice', 9 including race, 10 gender 11 or culture.'Global Justice',and its more recent incarnation, 'climate justice', 14 emerged from 'anti-globalisation protests', aimed in the first instance at global trade imbalances and then at international climate negotiations. Global justice retains a distinctly economic focus in arguing for the redistribution of existing wealth and indeed new distributions of wealth. Its procedural dimension concentrates specifically on reforming international governance structures. Global and climate justice share, moreover, a common preoccupation with increased recognition of under-represented cultures.Climate justice has, nonetheless, developed a more sophisticated research agenda through assessments of city and locally-based incarnations, 16 in addition to international-level action.

Energy justice (the focus here) carries the same Rawlsian liberalism approach, while incorporating Fraser's recognition of justice and cosmopolitan justice. Two critical distinctions are evident within this research agenda. The concept is, first, rooted to energy systems. In this way, therefore, it aims to provide all individuals, across all areas, with safe, affordable and sustainable energy. We increasingly need a more nuanced understanding of social justice concerns within energy systems, from production to consumption. Energy justice offers, second, a unique opportunity to engage with established thought in science, policy and activism. We will now cover in more detail two core themes or tenets of energy justice that have emerged in the justice literature for energy policy: recognition and procedural justice.

the framework

Our energy justice framework is underpinned by the principles of cosmopolitan justice. Cosmopolitan philosophy is the belief in that we are all 'world citizens'. 17 With the advent of clear and visible effects of climate change, the approach to environmental protection is being seen more in the light of cosmopolitan philosophy. Cosmopolitanism has, of course, a distinct and long history in global justice thinking. From this perspective, we build on environmental and climate justice demands for a collective approach to resources. The focus here, however, is targeted on energy resources in the Arctic regions in an attempt to achieve a meaningful global change, specifically in terms of energy behaviours and attitudes.

From this perspective we identify two frames of analysis for this chapter: procedure and recognition. An adoption of recognition justice could shed light on under-recognised sections of society. There is often not only a failure to recognise but also to misrecognise and therefore distort people's views, whcih can be demeaning or contemptible.Thus recognition justice includes calls to recognise the divergent perspectives rooted in social, cultural, ethnic, racial and gender differences.Second, energy justice requires the use of equitable procedures that engage all stakeholders in a non-discriminatory way.It states that all stakeholders in the Arctic should be able to participate in decision making, and that their contributions should be taken seriously throughout. It also requires participation, impartiality and full information disclosure by government and industry,and the use of appropriate and sympathetic engagement mechanisms.In addition, due process is relevant to every level of energy decision making at local, provincial, national and global levels. We expand this principle below to consider also the role of the 'non-human'.

Energy infrastructure development in the Arctic

The energy context in the Arctic is dominated by oil and gas reserves and the increasing role of international companies. Extraction and production takes place on the basis of resource ownership. The Arctic states are Canada, Denmark (with Greenland, an autonomous Danish dependent territory, and the Faroe Islands), Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the United States. However, according to the 1982 United Nations' Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), the right to explore natural resources in the ocean belongs to the coastal states within the distance of their Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ), that is, 200 nautical miles. Therefore, only six of the Arctic states can legally exploit oil and gas within the Arctic circle, namely Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Russia and the USA.

Non-Arctic states such as China, Japan, India and Singapore as well as the European Union have expressed their interest in engaging in Arctic-related activities ranging from research programmes to direct extractive operations. Some non-Arctic-based companies take part in joint projects with companies from the Arctic states, for example the Italian company ENI currently has a joint exploration agreement with the Russian organisation Rosneft. This creates a unique operational environment where a few actors representing countries with diverse economic, political and cultural backgrounds are responsible for a vulnerable and complex environment and the intimately linked futures of 400,000 indigenous peoples. The activities of energy companies that are exploring oil and gas in the Arctic are likely to determine the Arctic's economic, social and environmental well-being in the years to come.