ice sheet topography, 29 sea ice thickness,and more. The four Operation IceBridge (OIB) radars-accumulation radar, Ku-band radar altimeter, radar depth sounder and snow radar-were developed by the Center for Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS) at the University of Kansas. The radar depth sounder, for example, has been used to produce the latest

ice thickness maps for the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica.IceBridge data are publicly available through the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC): https:// nsidc.org/ data/ icebridge/

Ground-based radar at Store Glacier, West Greenland

The phase-sensitive FMCW radar was recently configured as an experimental imaging system and deployed at Store Glacier in West Greenland as part of the SAFIRE project led by the Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge.A photograph of the system deployed on the surface of the glacier is shown in4. The blue boxes contain an array of 8 transmit and 8 receive antennas which are arranged orthogonally to form a square 64-element virtual array looking down into the ice as illustrated in5. To achieve this, the radar signal is sequentially switched between 64 different combinations of transmit and receive antenna pairs.

Instead of emitting a single pulse at one designated frequency, as is the fundamental principle in traditional radars, this FMCW radar works by transmitting a chirp signal whose frequency is linearly swept from 200 MHz to 400 MHz. A wide signal bandwidth increases the vertical range resolution of the radar, in this case 42.5 cm with which individual layers within the ice can be distinguished. Conventional radars use high transmitting power to overcome the attenuation of the radar signal through the ice. Recent developments have allowed the peak output transmitting power level of the phase-sensitive FMCW radar to be as low as 100 mW, while consuming only 6 W of battery power during operation-less than a household light bulb.

Chirp signals are coupled into the ice using suitable antennas. Over the octave bandwidth of operation, certain types of antennas have proven to be useful and reliable. These include skeleton-slot panel antennasand low-cost custom designed cavity-backed bowtie antennasfor long-term unattended operation. The very low power

requirement of phase-sensitive FMCW radars provides a distinct advantage from a user's perspective. A static ground-based system that moves with the ice flow also enables many radar waveforms to be collected and coherently averaged to reduce the background noise level and therefore increase the detection capability of the radar. This advantage has been used to detect the base of grounded ice sheets over 3 km thick.A cross-sectional image through the ice formed by post-processing 37 the radar dataset is shown in6. The colour scale represents the intensity of the reflected radar signal. The processed radar image is analogous to an ultrasound of the ice. Here, three distinct layers of ice can be observed: an initial layer from the surface to around 100 m, followed by an ice layer 100-500 m, and finally another ice layer 500-600 m to the bed at approximately 618 m depth. These layers compare well with seismic data gathered in the same area and highlight the transition of the ice layers. At this particular site, a column of strong radar reflection was also observed from the surface down to around 100 m depth. It is believed this could be a water-/ air-filled crevasse feature.

One problem with this experimental imaging radar, however, is the apparent curvature of the ice layers particularly from the bedwhich should be horizontal in practice. The curvature is believed to be

a processing artefact resulting from the strong reflections that come from directly below the centre of the radar array, which swamp the true (weaker) returns that arrive from the wide angles. Improved methods of radar signal processing will be required to minimise this problem and this is the subject of further research.

These preliminary results from one field site in Greenland serve to illustrate the capabilities of modern radar techniques that are now being investigated further to help understand the processes occurring within ice sheets. The very low power requirement of the system means that it can operate all year, at hourly intervals, with a single 100 Ah battery. It can be complemented with invasive techniques such as borehole drilling to deploy sensors in situ within the ice.

Arctic science communication and outreach

The examples given in this chapter illustrate how radar can play an important role in documenting and encapsulating present-day climate change. For this reason, it is crucial to accurately translate the results generated by radar into accessible and engaging information to facilitate effective knowledge transfer to other academics, journalists, politicians and the general public. While it may be assumed that climate change policy relies on the latest results generated by science, there is a general reluctance from scientists in other disciplines, driven by various countervailing forces, to engage in political and public dialogue.However, such a dialogue is a vital step towards efforts to understand and combat change in the Arctic. This section will address how to effectively communicate Arctic science to a non-scientific audience.

the 'dos' and 'don'ts' of science communication Based on the experience of communicating our work to the public, press and politicians, we have compiled a list of the key 'dos' and 'don'ts' when answering questions or preparing a press release relating to scientific research.