Environmental organisations also saw themselves as important participants in shaping industrial development in the region and overall felt that their engagement with companies had been constructive, even while they maintained a vigilant attitude toward the companies involved. They felt increasingly well-educated by the process of engaging with petroleum companies new to the region, including being further attuned to the international practices and standards that may serve as pressure points on companies (as they are important for companies' access to international finance).

One interview was conducted with a representative of an indigenous Saami organisation visiting Murmansk. Here, the geographical focus on Murmansk city is limiting as most Saami organisations representing the approximately 2,000 Saami people in the region are headquartered elsewhere on the Kola Peninsula. This interviewee painted a worrying picture, arguing that the Saami had not been effectively consulted in terms of commercial developments and saying they felt they had been affected by industrial development relating to the offshore in subtle ways but that it is hard for them to prove causal links (with the burden of causality left placed on them). Other interviewees were dismissive about indigenous interest groups, indicating a divide in public engagement vis-à-vis the Shtokmann project along ethnic lines.

Reflections on the Murmansk case study

Despite the project remaining unrealised, a cross-section of the public in Murmansk nevertheless possessed well-developed expectations and perceptions of the oil and gas companies that had jockeyed for positions around the Shtokman gas field. Interviewees were reluctant to engage with the concept of CSR that the companies had brought with them and instead referred warmly to a gold standard of past and present employee benefits set by the industrial complexes of the Soviet period. Interviewees also had clear perceptions of their own and others' potential roles as stakeholders in managing an oil and gas future that had not come into existence. These findings suggest that the anticipatory practices around the Shtokman field have had lasting repercussions for how economic development and environmental risks are understood in the region and for shaping understandings of what kinds of stakeholders matter for large-scale economic development.

Kautokeino, Norway

In Norway, uncertainty around offshore oil and gas development has influenced national government efforts to revive its mining sector, which is focused particularly in Finnmark County in Northern Norway, where Saami reindeer herding is most intensely practised. Norway has opened no new mines in 30 years; therefore recent developments in Kautokeino and neighbouring Kvalsund have attracted great interest.While the Kvalsund copper mine may go ahead, the decision by Kautokeino to refuse a proposed gold mine has caused shock and questioning within Norway.

In September 2015 Kautokeino's municipal council placed a fouryear moratorium on discussions about whether or not to re-open their existing copper/ gold mine, known as Biedjovaggi. The municipality had twice rejected proposals by Swedish mining company Arctic Gold. Municipal leaders argued that reindeer herding is critically important for local livelihoods and the Saami culture, and they would prefer to protect and support the reindeer herding families who make up over half of Kautokeino's population of 1,386. 31 Mining is not the only threat to herding, although a map of exploration licences in Finnmark County reveals a land scattered with claims. It is one of many (cumulative) threats, including wind farms, roads, electric power lines, tourist cabins and hydropower projects.

Kautokeino had experience of mining from the 1970s to the early 1990s, when the previous copper/ gold mine was closed (for the second time).Today, Kautokeino has a budget deficit and one of the highest unemployment rates in Norway at 6.4 per cent, almost twice the national average of 3.3 per cent.Reindeer herding is the largest economic activity in Kautokeino, but it cannot provide for everyone.

The Kautokeino decision: how and why did the project not happen?

Finnmark County has a special status supporting the rights of the indigenous Saami, who make up around 10 per cent of the total population. Kautokeino municipality is situated in inner Finnmark, which has historically preserved traditional livelihoods and Saami language more than the coastal regions of Finnmark and has the largest concentration of reindeer herders in Norway.It is one of only two municipalities where the majority of the population is Saami and where the Saami language is used by most people in daily life. The practice of reindeer herding is important for maintaining the language and is protected through the Reindeer Act (2007). Saami rights are also protected by legislative developments in the 1980s and 1990s and the establishment of the Saami Parliament in 1987.

Arctic Gold took ten years to obtain an exploration licence for the Biedjovaggi mine from the Norwegian government. They succeeded in 2011 and invested heavily in exploratory drilling. The proposal was for an open pit mine, greatly expanding the footprint of the existing mine on land currently used as reindeer pasture. A clause in Norway's revisedallows municipal councils to decide whether or not to move forward with a mining project at the stage of environmental impact assessment (EIA). In April 2012 Kautokeino's 19-member municipal council, with a narrow 10-9 majority, voted not to allow Arctic Gold to do an EIA. Those who voted against the mine argued that people were well aware of the impacts of mining from previous experience and did not need an EIA. A further concern was the fact that a decision made after the EIA was completed could be challenged at the ministerial level in Oslo, thus taking power away from the municipality.