This chapter draws upon three sets of field work, in Greenland, Russia and Norway. Semi-structured qualitative interviews were a key method in all cases. In Upernavik, Greenland, a total of 16 qualitative interviews were conducted in 2013 and 2014 in Kalaallisut, the Greenlandic Inuit dialect. The research focused on capturing the expectations and aspirations of people living in the area, so as to document and understand their perspectives and the potential for the possible recruitment of locals to work in the industry while also securing local benefits.In Murmansk, Russia, a set of 21 qualitative interviews were carried out (in Russian) in April 2013 with government officials, company representatives, indigenous and civil society representatives and a sampling of 'everyday citizens' who had no direct connection to the oil and gas industry.The research aimed to understand how the urban Arctic residents of Murmansk reacted to and understood an unrealised petroleum development, how they envisioned the future of the region; and how they judged the petroleum companies' corporate social responsibility (CSR) efforts. In Kautokeino, Norway, a total of 26 qualitative interviews were held in 2015 and 2016 with rural residents living close to a proposed mine site. The interviews were held in Saami, Norwegian or English, with translation into Russian or English for the benefit of a multi-national research team. The aim was to understand the extent to which international standards and guidelines on ethical performance in the extractive industries are implemented at the local level.The case studies

Our case studies are linked primarily by the fact that in all localities a major extractive industry development was actively anticipated by the local community but ultimately did not take place. In the Greenlandic and Russian cases, this was for reasons beyond local control; in the Norwegian case it was a conscious decision made by the local municipality. Two of the case studies involve rural indigenous communities, but the Russian case study is of a non-indigenous urban population in Murmansk-the world's largest Arctic city. The Greenlandic and Russian case studies relate to offshore oil and gas, while the Norwegian case study relates to a proposed gold mine. Our aim is therefore not to draw direct comparisons or make scientifically grounded propositions, but to illustrate a range of local responses to a phenomenon-the unrealised project-that has been covered very little in the academic and policy literature to date.

Upernavik, Greenland

Oil and gas exploration in Greenland has been taking place since the early 1970s without any commercial discoveries yet being made. After a general low level of activity, the beginning of the new millennium brought remarkable increases in the global market price of crude oil (from less than 30 USD/ barrel to more than 100 USD/ barrel after 2007) and a subsequent increase in the exploration interests of oil companies in Greenland.The Government of Greenland (Naalakkersuisut) consequently released a hydrocarbon strategy for Greenland in 2002, announcing new licensing rounds for blocks offshore West Greenland in, the US Geological Survey published assessments of large quantities of undiscovered oil and gas resources in the Arctic. The survey indicated that offshore areas between West Greenland and East Canada could hold seven billion barrels of oil, while areas offshore East Greenland were estimated to hold nearly nine billion barrels of oil. The presence of significant gas reserves was also estimated in both offshore areas. Naalakkersuisut then released a second hydrocarbon strategy in 2009, which included a new licensing round in North West Greenland in the area of Baffin Bay in 2010 and a twophased licensing round offshore North East Greenland in 2012 and 2013The Baffin Bay licensing round led to seven new exploration licences and the licensing round in North East Greenland led to

four new exploration licences. In 2010 and 2011, Cairn Energy drilled eight wells offshore Central West Greenland. However, all wells were declared commercially dry.In 2012, a consortium of oil companies with exploration licences in Baffin Bay drilled 11 so-called 'shallow core holes' to evaluate the area. A further four operating companies, including Maersk Oil Kalaallit Nunaat, ConocoPhillips, Cairn Energy PLC and Shell Greenland, held licences to a total number of five blocks in the Baffin Bay area. Seismic exploration and site surveys were undertaken here in 2012 and 2013. The activities were the most extensive in any area of Greenland to date, and all taking place in the sea off Upernavik District. The exploration was expected to lead to the production of oil and related industrial activities; activities that could bring significant change to the communities, both in terms of impacts on nature, the local economy and social structures. During preparation for the exploration programmes, the operating companies were legally requested to, and did, undertake environmental and social baseline studies. They visited and engaged with the local communities to inform them about activities and to manage expectations.

In 2014, the Government of Greenland presented a new strategy on minerals and hydrocarbon resources. This strategy specifies selected areas to be announced for new licensing rounds or open door procedures including the areas of Baffin Bay, Davis Strait, west of Nuuk, Jameson Land, Nuussuaq Peninsula, South Greenland and South West Greenland. But in 2014/ 2015, the oil price dropped and the level of activity in Greenland similarly declined. After some years of holding on to their licences, several operating companies decided to give them up in 2016. The licences to only ten blocks are still active in 2016, including those in Baffin Bay.