Yet, Arctic development is a risky and costly venture. The major drawbacks include the remoteness and harsh climate conditions, which require more advanced technologies, equipment and infrastructure, as well as competition from unconventional gas sources such as shale gas and liquefied natural gas. In addition, there is a long investment cycle and potential overlap of sovereignty claims. The development of Arctic reserves, however, may have serious implications not only for an oil and gas company's budget, but for the global climate in general. Interventions in the fragile Arctic environment may put the future of the region and the planet under a great threat. While the rising demand for resources pushes companies to play for high stakes, environmentalists warn that the consequences of their actions may be irreversible.

Justice and Arcticness in energy infrastructure development

The first tenet of the framework manifests as a call for equitable procedures that engage all Arctic stakeholders in a non-discriminatory way. Arcticness is therefore dependent on voices being heard. Indigenous and non-indigenous peoples are central, for example, to monitoring the increase in tourism in the high north, but equally the intentions of business to develop there. Cultural pluralism is a place for creative industry. Fishing-or reindeer-based livelihoods should be respected. But more attention should be paid to the knowledge creation this involves with its implications for siting and procedural-based decisions. Land use change is a key challenge for indigenous peoples-who moderates if and where land is used for other uses? Holistic management plans are needed which focus equally on the land and not just the sea.

Early intervention is paramount to an effective consultation process. More positive examples were raised also, where companies took a more proactive and constructive approach. As Kadenic concluded in an examination of large-scale Arctic mining projects, the degree of local involvement during the planning phase will directly affect future socioeconomic outcomes.From siting decisions to projected habitat destruction, the Saami people, for example, can therefore help developers achieve common outcomes. Procedural justice is more than simply inclusion. It also involves the mobilisation of local knowledge.

A central theme in Arctic energy development is the identification of local communities. Projects in Canada involve multiple indigenous peoples in project development in an explicit attempt to profit from 'multiple views' on local knowledge and creativity. Almost all economic activity in Canada's Arctic is reviewed not just for its economic and environmental aspects but also social factors. However, the involvement of indigenous peoples has been limited. These differing views clearly indicate that a desirable level of economic activity, as well as the extent of being or feeling included in decision making is highly subjective and contextual.

On Russian oil development in the Arctic, there is trilateral policy making: businesses, local governments and indigenous peoples, all of whom need to get their 'fair share' from the activities agreed. Yet the latter group especially are often disadvantaged; for example, they frequently have to endure the low-level jobs which result from development projects. Large corporations come into local communities-where education levels tend to be low-with 500-page technical reports and ask for comments, which is not a fair way to involve the indigenous population. The large size of the corporations involved means that decisions are taken at far away headquarters, while local representatives have to manage their implications for affected communities.

The second tenet of our framework, recognition justice, sheds light on instances of under-or mis-recognition of vulnerability. Local communities such as the indigenous Saami peoples are scattered across most of the northern parts of Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia, living off fishing and reindeer herding. In addition, there is an underrecognised importance of the non-indigenous people in this area. In both cases, these populations are heavily dependent on local ecosystems. Hence, such communities are extremely vulnerable to energy development.

The richness of fossil fuel energy resources in the Arctic area can be considered in contrast to the provision of energy and electricity in many of those areas. A number of Arctic regions in Alaska are off the electricity grid and electricity has to be generated by diesel generators. This is highly problematic in many ways and contributes (next to health issues) to comparatively low living standards. Such lower standards of living in areas of fuel richness point to local communities having an insufficient level of participation and an inadequate stake in the wealth generated by exploitation activities. As Parlee notes, indigenous communities often have limited access to certain forms of capital and are therefore particularly susceptible to the resource curse phenomenon.Increasing living standards in the Arctic region is a central mechanism for reducing vulnerability, while simultaneously threatening the environment. The low population density within the Arctic hints at the vast natural space, precisely what makes the Arctic so unique. Tourism in the Arctic region will increase with a growing global upper middle class which is looking for more authentic and exotic holiday experiences. This comes with its own challenges: for example, little effort is put into preserving reindeer herding as one of the large traditional economic activities. Tourism, if exercised in certain ways and at certain scales, will itself contribute to environmental degradation and create issues of a different nature, depriving the Arctic of its unique vastness. Stewart and colleagues report that while the opportunity to educate visitors appears as a positive benefit reflected in the perspectives of residents about cruise tourism in Nunavut, there are emerging risks at the community level which highlight the need for appropriate policies to mitigate the vulnerability of those communities.