Yet not only Arctic, but also some near-, sub-, and non-Arctic countries position their interests in the region by arguing for their Arcticness on the basis of geographical proximity or security and economic interests 2 while asserting their 'perceptions and strategies of Arcticness'. 3 These perceptions and strategies then suggest the complexities of the term Arcticness: namely, its contextual meaning and usage in accordance with the different perceptions and strategies of a range of societal, political, economic, environmental and scientific actors.

Perhaps a good place to start in order to shed some initial light on this notion is by looking at the most obvious: the popular perceptions and fantasies of 'outsiders'; that is, populations living outside of the Arctic. Of course, this in itself constitutes a problem of definition. When is somebody considered to be living 'outside of the Arctic'? Does that refer to any point below the Arctic Circle, or are people in close subArctic regions with similar conditions still 'too Arctic' to be considered non-Arctic? Furthermore, are southerners' perceptions of so-called Arctic nations different based on an assumed, more intimate understanding of their countries' northern dimensions?

Here, a simplistic yet pragmatic line is drawn by referring to 'outside perspectives' as being those of people who do not belong to Arctic countries defined geographically. While it may seem trivial to explore these outside perspectives in this context, they are far from irrelevant as they have the potential to influence Arctic politics and, hence, 'insider' narratives of Arcticness. One glance at current environmental debates suffices to reveal the power of outsiders' perceptions and attention. Hence, exploring these outsiders' perspectives is well worth the effort.

It appears that even among societal elites and non-elites who have perhaps never experienced the Arctic first-hand, there seems to be an almost intuitive feeling of what Arcticness might be. The examination of popular culture, literature and visual arts (see for instance, Corey Arnold's Arctic photography: http:// coreyfishes.com) shows that particular Arctic attributes dominate the popular imagination: 4 snow, ice and cold weather; untouched, pristine and desert-like landscapes; long, dark periods versus long periods of eternal sun; indigenous communities; fishermen (this gendered term is used here intentionally) and masculinity; the intimate relationship between people and their environment, as well as an abundance of natural resources-or in other cases, the scarcity of resources.In sum, the Arctic, the north, and the apparent Arcticnorth construct in the outsider's collective image resemble a near-binary dichotomy of simplistic generalisations and stereotypes of nature and culture(s).

While popular media on climate change concerns may contradict notions of the Arctic as a pristine region, 6 the efforts to raise awareness of its global relevance beyond Arctic latitudinal borders 7 rarely go beyond reminding viewers of the fragility of this space through the threat of near apocalyptic determinism. As such, they reinforce some of the listed fantasies about the Arctic and the perception of a global imperative to protect it. That is, Arcticness emerges as a collection of the same aforementioned environmental and physical attributes that are now simply of a more global concern, driving outsiders' calls to keep the Arctic as the untouched, pristine place they perceive it to be.

Seen this way, Arcticness represents the character of the Arctic as featured in outsiders' collective constructs-a more or less coherent space disrupted by climate change and made up of the aforementioned elements or a perceived absence thereof, rather than a more realistic, 'dynamic, transnational, connected and contested region where natures, identities, histories and politics all intersect'. 8 In fact, the distance between outsiders' perceptions and 'northern peoples' perceptions of themselves and their homeland is as vast as the Arctic landscape'.The analysis of such 'at best simple and incomplete and at worst incorrect and prejudiced perceptions', 10 have led some scholars 11 to draw connections to Said's 'Orientalism'.The resulting references to 'Eskimo Orientalism' 13 or 'Arctic Orientalism'are not without merit as collective images of the Arctic have been fundamentally driven by either past or modern scientific imagery.More so, these served as a mirror of one's (western/ southern) self, 'a strategy of imagining the self as an explorer-hero, a scientific worker, or a white, imperial male' 16-ultimately emphasising the (political) power to objectify the 'other' versus the civilised 'self'. Thus, it is perhaps unsurprising that colonially charged male Arctic exploration and scientific inquiry, and the resulting descriptions/ travelogues, have contributed to gendered portrayals of Arctic nature and indigenous communities and cultures and, thus, perceptions of Arcticness. This gendered image is further perpetuated through influential popular magazines such as National Geographic, 17 high literature and visual arts, taking inspiration from such 'scientific' imagery. Arctic nature is then 'romanticised through literary stereotypes based on masculinist values'.