The chapter is meant merely to present a snapshot in time of personal perceptions by fellow Northerners and myself on our common characteristics in 2016. The topics in the replies were inherently interconnected, but for the sake of simplicity I have grouped them under three headings, which I present and elaborate on.

The sounds of quiet

The environment in the Arctic is often described in international literature as fragile, vulnerable and sensitive, but as a Northerner you tend, rather, to perceive the surrounding environment as great, strong and potentially dangerous, fostering respect and continuous adaptation. The weather conditions are extreme and harsh, but nature is also the provider of the resources needed to survive and the greatness and beauty of Arctic nature is stunning to its residents. I expect that this is a part of the explanation as to why we as Northerners feel need, love and fear of Arctic nature all at the same time.

Emphasised by my Arctic contacts, in relation to Northerners' connection with nature, is the love of the sounds of quiet. 'We love the greatness of our nature, which allows the remote feeling that gives you room to breathe and space to unfold' as one of my Greenlandic friends stated. The silence is particularly remarkable in the Arctic as it contrasts the noises whenever a storm or blizzard sets in and the moments of silence are the times where you stop and think, and make you present in the presence. One of the respondents noted 'You know you are from the Arctic when you live in nature and the nature lives in you'. And this underlines the special bond Northerners feel to nature.

Related to the silence and the bond to nature, a particular Arctic phenomenon is the aurora borealis, also called the polar lights, but by Northerners mostly known as the northern lights. The magnificence of the bulging light waves across the skies at night is subject to various myths and legends across the Arctic region. As a child growing up in South Greenland, I was scared to whistle during northern lights, as it was said that the light was created when the dead played ball across the sky, and if you whistled, they would come and take your head to use it as a ball. In general, ghost stories and creepy myths are also something we share in the Arctic. I think the huge wilderness and uncontrolled nature, and the long dark winter nights, create an atmosphere that invites these stories to be told. Every place I have visited in the Arctic, people have their own stories and love to give each other the creeps. As noted by a woman from Alaska, you know you are from the Arctic 'when you grew up with stories about the little men of the tundra and their poison tipped spears'.

In relation to the natural environment and climate in the Arctic, an inevitable part is the cold and the fresh air and low humidity. Related to the sound of silence and the cold and dry climate, therefore, is the sound of squeaking snow. Snow, when it is really cold and dry, makes a particular noise. Some years ago, I conducted an interview with a lady who was, at the time, the oldest woman in Qeqertarsuaq, Greenland. I was asking her about issues related to climate change and when I asked if the weather in recent years was good or bad, she answered that she could not define on behalf of others what was good or bad. What may be good weather for fishers may be bad weather for hunters, but one thing that she could tell me was that she missed the sound of squeaking snow under her kamiks (seal skin boots) in the winter as the temperature rose and the winters became milder. The interview was one of those that left an impression, and I clearly remember her face and voice.

Isolation and togetherness

Arctic communities in general are small in size and the number of inhabitants is low. The communities are typically geographically dispersed and remote. The infrastructure is sparse and travel happens by plane, boat, helicopter or snowmobile or even by sledge, on horseback or on ice roads in the winter. This means that many communities are as isolated as if they were each located on their own islands, creating a situation where social relations among residents within a community can be very strong and intimate.

Relations between different communities are also important. In Greenland, one of the first things you ask when you meet other Greenlanders is who they are related to. While I was conducting interviews in North Greenland in 2013, all the conversations I had were initiated by the interviewees asking about which town I come from and about my background, parents and relatives. When they had an idea of where I belonged and common acquaintances were identified, the interviews could begin. Family bonds tie people together and a comfortable atmosphere can be reached when relations are shared, and they always are. We are so few, that family and friends are always to some degree shared within the same countries, even when we each live in our end of the country.

Another aspect related to living in the small communities in the Arctic is that we live close to each other. As one stated: 'You know that you are from the Arctic when grocery shopping involves talking to friends, neighbours, and colleagues'. It is difficult to hide abuse, an affair or crime. And even though taboos exist here and there are things that are 'not being talked about', secrets are not easily kept. Issues connected to the social relations and networks in the communities were highlighted by Northerners addressing the question of what being Arctic entails, with an emphasis on how we, to a large extent, accept peculiarities of other community members, not least in recognition of every person being a resource in a local community, and in recognition of most people or families having their own secrets to live with and for others to accept.