

The First World War and its aftermath brought dramatic changes to conditions of life in Vienna. Popper's father lost much of his savings. Popper left home and moved into part of a disused military hospital converted by students into a primitive students' home, and joined socialist groups seeking political change. For a time, Popper thought of himself as a communist. But then, on 15 June 1919, an event occurred which Popper was later to describe as one of the most important in his life; it caused him to become critical of communism and Marxism, and, years later, led to the writing of his The Open Society and Its Enemies. The communists organized a demonstration with the intention of freeing communists held in a police station in Vienna. The police opened fire, and some of the demonstrators were killed. Popper was deeply shocked, and even felt some personal responsibility for the tragedy, in that he had endorsed a doctrine, Marxism, which required that there should be just such incidents, so that the struggle to overcome capitalism might be intensified. was aware of Popper's low opinion of Wittgenstein). 1 Nevertheless, Popper did attend, and give papers at, a number of fringe seminars, and his work was strongly influenced by, but also critical of, the doctrines of the Circle.

1.2 Early work

Two issues were of central concern to Popper. The first was the problem of how to distinguish science from pseudoscience. Popper was impressed by the difference between the theories of Marx, Freud and Adler on the one hand, and Einstein's general theory of relativity, on the other. The former theories seemed able to explain phenomena whatever happened; nothing, it seemed, could tell against these theories. Einstein's theory, by contrast, issued in a definite prediction: light travelling near the sun would pursue a curved path due to the gravitational field of the sun. If this did not happen, Einstein's theory would be refuted. Popper decided, around 1921 (he tells us) that this constituted the key difference between pseudo and genuine scientific theories: whereas the former were unrefutable, the latter were open to empirical refutation (see

The other problem that preoccupied Popper was that of the logic, or methodology, of scientific discovery: How does science acquire new knowledge? This was the problem that confronted Popper when his earlier interest in the psychology of thinking transmuted into interest in the logic of thinking, the logic of discovery.

Suddenly, Popper tells us, he put two and two together. His earlier solution to the first problem also solves the second problem. There is no such thing as the verification of theories in science; there is only refutation. Scientists put forward theories as empirically falsifiable conjectures or guesses, and these are then subjected to sustained attempted empirical refutation. Science advances through a process of trial and error, of conjecture and refutation.

Encouraged by Feigl, Popper wrote the first volume of what was intended to be a two-volume work, entitled Die beiden Grundprobleme der Erkenntnistheorie (The Two Fundamental Problems of the Theory of Knowledge). The first volume was accepted for publication by Schlick and Frank, the editors of a series of publications written mostly by members of the Vienna Circle. The publisher, Springer, insisted the book must be shortened. But in the meantime Popper had finished the second volume. He offered a new work consisting of extracts from both volumes, but this was still judged by Springer to be too long. Popper's uncle, Walter Schiff, cut the manuscript by about a half, and this was finally published late in 1934 as Logik der Forschung. Thus emerged into the public domain, in the shadow of Hitler and impending war, what is, perhaps, the most important book on scientific method to be published in the last century. The book was only published in English translation, as The Logic of Scientific Discovery (with many additional appendices and footnotes), in 1959. (Die beiden Grundprobleme der Erkenntnistheorie was not published until much later, in 1979.)

1.3 The Logic of Scientific Discovery

The Logic of Scientific Discovery (L.Sc.D.) begins by spelling out what are, for Popper, the two fundamental problems concerning the nature of scientific inquiry. (1) The problem of induction: how can scientific theories be verified by evidence, in view of Hume's arguments which seem to show that this is impossible? (2) The problem of demarcation: How is science to be demarcated from non-science (pseudoscience and metaphysics)? As we saw above, Popper's solution to the second problem is that, in order to be scientific, a theory must be empirically falsifiable. This, for Popper, solves the first problem as well. Scientific laws and theories cannot be verified by evidence at all; they can only be falsified. However much evidence may be amassed in support of a theory, its probability remains zero. But despite this negative conclusion, science can still make progress. This comes about as a result of theories being proposed as conjectures, in response to problems; these conjectures are then subjected to a ruthless barrage of attempted empirical refutation. The purpose of observation and experimentation is not to verify, but to refute. When a theory is refuted empirically, this creates the problem of discovering a new conjecture, a new theory, which is even more successful than its predecessor in that it meets with all the success of its predecessor, successfully predicts the phenomena that refuted its predecessor, and predicts new phenomena as well. When such a theory is formulated, the task then becomes to try to refute this new theory in turn. Thus science advances, from one falsifiable conjecture to another, each successfully predicting more than its predecessor, but none ever having probability greater than zero. All theoretical knowledge in science is irredeemably conjectural in character. But science makes progress precisely because, in science, it is possible to discover that theories are false, and thus need to be replaced by something better.