It may be asked how it is possible for AOE to be both more Popperian than Popper and more Kuhnian than Kuhn. The answer is that AOE is more Popperian that Popper in making explicit, and so criticizable, metaphysical theses which falsificationism denies, and thus leaves implicit and uncriticizable within science. But AOE is also more Popperian than Popper in insisting we need to exploit criticism critically, so that it furthers, and does not sabotage, the growth of knowledge. Criticism needs to be marshalled and directed at that part of our conjectural knowledge which it is, we conjecture, the most fruitful to criticize. This means directing critical fire at level 2 theories and level 3 blueprints, it being less likely, though still possible, that criticism of the level 4 thesis of physicalism will aid the growth of empirical knowledge. Physicalism has played an extraordinarily fruitful role in the advancement of scientific knowledge; it should not be abandoned unless an even more apparently fruitful idea is forthcoming, or unless the empirical and explanatory success that physicalism appears to have engendered turns out to be illusory. It is this persistence of physicalism, for good Popperian reasons, which gives to theoretical physics, and indeed to the whole of natural science, something of the character of Kuhn's normal science, with physicalism as its quasi-permanent "paradigm".

2.8 Imre Lakatos

Lakatos sought to reconcile the very different views of science held by Popper and Kuhn. According to Kuhn, far from seeking falsifications of the best available theory, as Popper held, scientists protect the accepted theory, or "paradigm", from refutation for most of the time, the task being to fit recalcitrant phenomena into the framework of the paradigm. Only when refutations become overwhelming, does crisis set in; a new paradigm is sought for and found, a revolution occurs, and scientists return to doing "normal science", to the task of reconciling recalcitrant phenomena with the new paradigm. Lakatos sought to reconcile Popper and Kuhn by arguing that science consists of competing fragments of Kuhnian normal science, or "research programmes", to be assessed, eventually, in terms of their relative empirical success and failure. Instead of research programmes running in series, one after the other, as Kuhn thought, research programmes run in parallel, in competition, this doing justice to Popper's demand that there should be competition between theories (a point emphasized especially by Feyerabend).Lakatos became so impressed with the Kuhnian point that theories always face refutations, the empirical successes of a theory being a far more important guide to scientific progress than refutation, that he finally came to the conclusion that Popper's philosophy of science was untenable.

AOE has a number of features in common with Lakatos's methodology of scientific research programmes. AOE makes extensive use of the notion of scientific research programme. Like Lakatos's view, AOE exploits the idea that such research programmes can, sometimes, be compared with respect to how empirically progressive they are. AOE, again like Lakatos's view, sees the whole of science as a gigantic scientific research programme. And, like Lakatos's view, AOE can be construed as synthesizing Popper's and Kuhn's views.

But there are also striking differences. There are differences in the way scientific research programmes are conceived, especially research programmes in fundamental physics. For Lakatos, the main components of a research programme are the "hard core" (corresponding to Kuhn's "paradigm"), and the "protective belt" of "auxiliary hypotheses", which facilitate the application of the hard core to empirical phenomena. The main business of a research programme is to develop the protective belt, thus extending, and making more accurate, the empirical predictions of the hard core. The hard core is a testable theory rendered metaphysical by the methodological decision not to allow it to be refuted, refutations being directed at the protective belt rather than the hard core.

According to AOE, by contrast, the metaphysical kernel of a research programme is not a testable theory but rather a thesis that is genuinely metaphysical (i.e. more or less unspecific, and usually untestable)-a thesis such as the corpuscular hypothesis, Boscovich's point-atom blueprint, Einstein's unified field blueprint and so on. The basic aim of the programme is to turn the relatively unspecific blueprint into a precise, testable (and true) physical theory. The research programme thus consists of a succession of theories, T 1 , T 2  T n , which can be compared, not only with respect to empirical success, but also with respect to how adequately each theory encapsulates, or exemplifies, the blueprint of the programme. (The latter is not possible within a Lakatosian programme.) Whereas a Lakatosian programme has a fixed basic theory (or hard core), and seeks to improve auxiliary hypotheses (the protective belt), an AOE programme strives to capture the blueprint more and more adequately by means of testable physical theories. Both Lakatos's view and AOE permit one to see natural science as one gigantic research programme, but how this programme is construed is very different. For Lakatos, "science as a whole can be regarded as a huge research programme with Popper's supreme heuristic rule: 'devise conjectures with more empirical content than their predecessors' "