

Falsificationism, lacking this hierarchical structure, cannot begin to do justice to this key feature of scientific method, diversity at one level, unity at another; nor can it begin to do justice to the rational need for this feature of scientific method.There is a further, important point. Any new conception of science which improves our understanding of science ought to enable us to improve scientific practice. It would be very odd if our ability to do science well were wholly divorced from our understanding of what we are doing. A test for a new theory of scientific method ought to be, then, that it improves scientific practice, and does not merely accurately depict current practice. AOE passes this test. In providing a framework for the articulation and scrutiny of level 3 metaphysical blueprints, as an integral part of science itself, and thus providing a rational means for the development of new non-empirical methods, new symmetry principles and new theories, AOE advocates, in effect, that current practice in theoretical physics be modified. AOE makes explicit what is at present only implicit. And more generally, in depicting scientific method in a hierarchical, meta-methodological fashion, AOE has implications for method throughout the natural sciences, and not just for theoretical physics.

In case it should seem miraculous that science has made progress without AOE being generally understood and accepted, I should add that good science has always put something close to AOE into practice in an implicit, somewhat covert way, and it is this which has made progress possible.

2.7 Thomas Kuhn

As I remarked in section 2.1 above, the main difference betweenpicture of science and Popper's is that, whereas Kuhn stresses that, within normal science, paradigms are dogmatically protected from refutation, from criticism, Popper holds that theories must always be subjected to severe attempted refutation. AOE is even more Popperian than Popper's falsificationism, in that AOE exposes to criticism assumptions that falsificationism denies, and thus shields from criticism. One might think, therefore, that AOE would differ even more from Kuhn's picture of science than falsificationism does.

It is therefore rather surprising that exactly the opposite is the case: in some important respects, AOE is closer to Kuhn than to Popper.

The picture of science that emerges from Kuhn (1970a) may be summarized like this. There are three stages to consider. First, there is a pre-scientific stage: the discipline is split into a number of competing schools of thought which give different answers to fundamental questions. There is debate about fundamental questions between the schools, but no overall progress, and no science.

Second, the ideas of one such school begin to meet with empirical success; these ideas become a "paradigm", and the pre-scientific school becomes normal science (competing schools withering away). Within normal science, no attempt is made to refute the paradigm (roughly, the basic theory of the science); indeed, the paradigm may be accepted even though there are well-known apparent refutations. When the paradigm fails to predict some phenomenon, it is not the paradigm, but the skill of the scientist, that is put to the test. The task of the normal scientist is to solve puzzles, rather than problems. The paradigm specifies what is to count as a solution, specifies what methods are to be employed in order to obtain the solution and guarantees that the solution exists: these are all characteristics of puzzles rather than open-ended problems. The task is gradually to extend the range of application of the paradigm to new phenomena, textbook successes being taken as models of how to proceed. Methods devolve from paradigms.

Third, the paradigm begins to accumulate serious failures of prediction; these resist all attempts at resolution, and some scientists lose faith in the capacity of the paradigm to overcome these "anomalies". A new paradigm is proposed, which does resolve these recalcitrant anomalies, but which may not, initially, successfully predict all that the old paradigm predicted. Empirical considerations do not declare that the new paradigm is, unequivocally, better than the old. Normal science gives way to a period of revolutionary science. Scientists again debate fundamentals, arguments for and against the rival paradigms, often presupposing what they seek to establish. Rationality breaks down. If the revolution is successful, the new paradigm wins out, and becomes the basis for a new phase of normal science. Many old scientists do not accept the new paradigm; they die holding on to their convictions.

Kuhn argues that the dogmatic attitude inherent in normal science is necessary if science is to make progress. Applying a paradigm to new phenomena, or to old phenomena with increasing accuracy, is often extremely difficult. If every failure was interpreted as a failure of the paradigm, rather than of the scientist, paradigms would be rejected before their full range of successful application had been discovered. By refusing to reject a paradigm until the limits of its successes have been reached, scientists put themselves into a much better position to develop and apply a new paradigm. For reasons such as these, normal science, despite being ostensibly designed to discover only the expected, is actually uniquely effective in disclosing novelty.