It amounts simply to this. Bare falsificationism fails dramatically to do justice to the way theories are selected in science (entirely independently of any question of verification, justification or falsification). Dressed falsificationism does better justice to scientific practice, but commits science to making substantial, influential and problematic assumptions that remain implicit, and cannot adequately be made explicit within science. Science pursued in accordance with dressed falsificationism is irrational, in other words, because it fails to implement the elementary, and quasi-Popperian, requirement for rationality that "assumptions that are substantial, influential, problematic and implicit need to be made explicit, so that they can be critically assessed and so that alternatives may be put forward and considered, in the hope that such assumptions can be improved". Dressed falsificationism fails, in other words, for good Popperian reasons: it fails to expose substantial, influential, problematic assumptions to criticism within science.

2.3 Refutation of bare falsificationism

Here, then, in a little more detail, is my refutation of bare falsificationism. Given any accepted physical theory, at any stage in the development of physics, however empirically successful (however highly corroborated)-Newtonian theory, say, or classical electrodynamics, quantum theory, general relativity, quantum electrodynamics, chromodynamics or the standard model-there will always be endlessly many rival falsifiable theories that can easily be formulated which will fit the available data just as well as the accepted theory. Taking Newtonian theory (NT) as an example of an accepted theory, here are two examples of rival theories. NT*: "Everything occurs as NT asserts, until the first second of the year 2100, when an inverse cube law of gravitation will abruptly hold." NT**: "Everything occurs as NT asserts, except for systems consisting of gold spheres, each having a mass of 1,000 tons, interacting with each other gravitationally in outer space, in a vacuum, within a spherical region of 10 miles: for these systems, Newton's law of gravitation is repulsive, not attractive." (For further examples and discussion, see. It is easy to see that there are infinitely many such rivals to NT, just as empirically successful (at the moment) as NT. The predictions of NT may be represented as points in a multidimensional space, each point corresponding to some specific kind of system (there being infinitely many points). NT has only been verified (corroborated) for a minute region of this space. In order to concoct a (grossly ad hoc) rival to NT, which is just as empirically successful as NT, all we need do is identify some region in this space that includes no prediction of NT that has been verified, and then modify the laws of NT arbitrarily, for just that identified region.

The crucial question now is this: On what basis does bare falsificationism reject all these falsifiable but unfalsified rival theories? According to bare falsificationism, T 2 is to be accepted in preference to T 1 if T 1 has been falsified, T 2 has greater empirical content (is more falsifiable) than T 1 , T 2 successfully predicts all that T 1 successfully predicts, T 2 successfully predicts the phenomena that falsified T 1 , and T 2 successfully predicts new phenomena not predicted by T 1 (see Popper, 1959, pp. 81-4 and elsewhere). Given NT, it is a simple matter to concoct rival theories, of the above type, that satisfy all the above bare falsificationist requirements for being more acceptable than NT. Most accepted physical theories yield empirical predictions that clash with experiments, and thus are ostensibly falsified. We can always concoct new theories, in the way just indicated, doctored to yield the "correct" predictions. We can add on independently testable auxiliary postulates, thus ensuring that the new theory has greater empirical content than the old one. And no doubt this excess content will be corroborated. For details of how this can be done, see. Such theories are, of course, grossly ad hoc, grossly "aberrant" as I have called them, but they satisfy Popper's (1959) requirements for being better theories than accepted physical theories.

It is worth noting that such "better" theories need not be quite as wildly ad hoc as the ones indicated above; sometimes such theories are actually put forward in the scientific literature, and yet are not taken seriously, even by their authors, let alone by the rest of the scientific community. An example is an ad hoc version of NT put forward by Maurice Levy in 1890, which combined in an ad hoc way two distinct modifications of Newton's law of gravitation, one based on the way Weber had proposed Coulomb's law should be modified, the other based on the way Riemann had proposed Coulomb's law should be modified (for details see. By 1890, NT had been refuted by observation of the precession of the perihelion of the orbit of Mercury; attempts to salvage NT by postulating an additional planet, Vulcan, had failed. Levy's theory successfully predicted all the success of NT, and in addition successfully predicted the observed orbit of Mercury, just that which refuted NT; in addition, of course, it made predictions different from NT for further Sun-Mercury type systems not yet observed. Despite this, Levy's theory was not taken seriously for a moment, not even by Levy himself. How can bare falsificationism recommend rejection of such ad hoc versions of NT when they satisfy all the requirements of bare falsificationism for being more acceptable theories? No adequate answer is forthcoming, and it is this which spells the downfall of bare falsificationism-as Popper may himself have realized when he put forward dressed falsificationism in his C.R.