

Such an amalgam of Figures 5.1 and 9.1 (see Chapter 9) is not altogether satisfactory. It is somewhat arbitrary to declare that physicalism(n>4, N=9) represents a partially physically comprehensible universe, but physicalism(n>4, N=10) does not. Some may question that the alternative thesis at level 7-the thesis that the universe is comprehensible non-physically-has anything to do with physics, or science. One can imagine circumstances, however, in which this thesis might well be preferred to any thesis of partial physical comprehensibility. Suppose God manifests Himself in the sky, and responds to our requests to perform specific miracles by doing just that-converting the orbit of Mercury into a square orbit, for example, or lifting everyone on earth one foot into the air, except where this is impossible or dangerous. How could we not accept, in such circumstances, that God is ultimately in charge of Nature?

Reasons for accepting these theses are similar to those given for accepting the hierarchy of theses of the view depicted in

and 5.1. As a result of accepting this hierarchy of theses, physics provides itself with a framework of assumptions, and associated methods, high up in the hierarchy, which it will never benefit the pursuit of knowledge to reject; in this way, a framework is created within which very much more substantial and dubious theses, low down in the hierarchy, can be critically scrutinized and, we may hope, improved. The thesis at the top of the hierarchy, at level 9, asserts that the universe is such that we can acquire some knowledge of our local circumstances. If this assumption is false, we will not be able to acquire knowledge whatever we assume. We are justified in accepting this assumption permanently as a part of our knowledge, even if we have no grounds for holding it to be true, since accepting it can only help, and cannot hinder, the acquisition of knowledge whatever the universe is like. The thesis at level 4, physicalism(8), deserves to be accepted because of its extraordinary scientific fruitfulness. All major theoretical developments in physics point towards, and draw closer to, physicalism(8), in that they are invariably major steps in unification, as we saw in section 5.5 above. From the standpoint of scientific fruitfulness, at this level, physicalism(8) has no rival, unless it is the even more substantial thesis of Lagrangianism. Nevertheless, physicalism(8) may be false, and physics may, at some stage, need to adopt a different thesis. Accepting physicalism(8) within the framework of theses just indicated facilitates the development of alternatives, should this be necessary.

The view depicted in

.1 has, perhaps, a more direct relevance to theoretical physics; AOE as depicted in

.1 would become relevant if it emerged that the universe differs radically from the way modern science assumes it to be. AOE is more relevant to the philosophy of physics; it is required to solve the problem of induction, as we shall see in Chapter 7 (see also.) It is also required to rebut objections of circularity, as we shall now see.

5.9 The circularity problem solved

One feature of the views depicted in Figures 2.1 and 5.1 may be deemed puzzling. They hold that when metaphysical thesis and physical theory clash, physical theory may be revised, but also that metaphysical thesis may be revised. How is such a two-way influence possible? In what follows I consider AOE as depicted in the previous section.

The first point to note is that just such a two-way influence occurs when theory and experiment clash. In general, if a theory clashes with an experiment that has been subjected to expert critical scrutiny and repeated, the theory is rejected. But on occasions, it turns out that it is the experimental result that is wrong, not the theory.In a somewhat similar way, if a new theory increases the conflict between the totality of physical theory and the currently accepted metaphysical thesis, at level 3 of the previous section, the new theory will be rejected (or not even considered or formulated).On occasions, however, a new theory may be developed which increases the conflict between the totality of theory and the current thesis at level 3 but decreases the conflict between the totality of theory and physicalism at level 4. In this case the new theory may legitimately be accepted and the thesis at level 3 may be revised. In principle, as I have already indicated, theses even higher up in the hierarchy may legitimately be revised in this way. A virtue of these hierarchical views is that they make possible and facilitate such two-way revisions.

However, another, potentially more serious, problem faces the two hierarchical views indicated above. Both incorporate what seems to be vicious circularity. Acceptance of theories is influenced by their degree of accord with metaphysical principles, the acceptance of which is in turn, in part, influenced by an appeal the empirical success of physical theories. The claim is that as theoretical knowledge and understanding improves, metaphysical theses and associated methods improve as well. There is something like positive feedback between improving knowledge, and improving knowledge-about-how-to-improve-knowledge. This, it is claimed, is the methodological key to the great success of modern science, namely that it adapts its metaphysical assumptions and methods (its aims and methods) to what it finds out about the nature of the universe.