It is important to appreciate, however, thatare all versions of the same basic idea that T is unified if and only if the content of T is the same throughout the range of possible phenomena to which it applies. When T is disunified, (1) to (8) specify different kinds of difference in the content of T in diverse regions of the space, S, of all possible phenomena to which T applies. Or, equivalently, (1) to (8) divide S into sub-regions in different ways, T having a different content in each sub-region. For (1), subregions contain physical systems in different locations in space-time, the content of T being different in different space-time locations. For (2), sub-regions contain physical systems with different values of physical variables such as mass or relative velocity. For (3), sub-regions contain systems with different dynamically unique objects. For (4), sub-regions contain systems composed of physical entities interacting by means of different forces. For (5), sub-regions contain systems composed of entities interacting by means of the same force, but with different dynamical properties such as values of mass or charge. For (6), sub-regions contain systems composed of different entities that cannot be transformed into each other by means of symmetry operations. For (7), sub-regions contain systems composed of different entities that cannot be construed to differ only because of the product of spontaneous symmetry breaking. For (8), S contains one sub-system consisting of empty space-time, and another consisting of space-time plus some physical entity, and the one cannot be transformed into the other by means of a symmetry operation. We have here eight facets of a single conception of unity.It needs now to be appreciated that, corresponding to these eight facets of unity, (1) to (8), there are eight different metaphysical theses, eight different versions of physicalism, any one of which might be held to be the best choice of presupposition for physics. If T is the true theory of everything,then we have eight different theses, each of the form "T is unified up to sense (n)" where n = 1, 2,  8, corresponding to the eight different kinds of unity. Let us call these eight theses "physicalism(n)", where n = 1, 2,  8. It is assumed, here, that in each case, (1) to (8), the degree of unity, N, is 1. If we allow N = 1, 2, 3, , then there are not eight, but infinitely many different versions of physicalism, depending on the degree of unity, N, that is asserted for any value of n = 1,  7. (n = 8 is exceptional in this respect in that, in this case, N can only equal 1 or 2, depending on whether space-time and matter are, or are not, unified. 17 )

The different versions of physicalism can be specified to be: physicalism(n, N), with n = 1,  7 and N = 1, 2,  , or with n = 8 and N = 1, 2. A two-dimensional grid is placed over an infinite set of metaphysical theses, distinct versions of physicalism corresponding to distinct appropriate values of the coordinates (n, N), these theses being ordered with respect to degrees of unity.It deserves to be noted in passing that there is a close connection between the "unity" of a physical theory and its "explanatory power". Explanatory power, one might say, is unity plus empirical content. The explication of "unity" indicated here, and spelled out in more detail in Chapter 4, is thus also an explication of "explanatory power".5.4 Conflicting desiderata for acceptability of metaphysical theses

Physics must exclude empirically successful disunified theories from consideration if theoretical knowledge in physics is to be possible at all. In persistently excluding such disunified theories, physics thereby makes a persistent metaphysical presupposition, as we saw in section 4.2. But what ought this presupposition to be? Section 4.3 has revealed that there are at least eight candidates, namely physicalism(n) with n = 1,  8 (and, potentially, many more if N > 1 for some n). Which of these is the best choice if physics is to comply with PIR?

This question is particularly hard to answer because conflicting desiderata arise when it comes to considering what metaphysical thesis physics should accept.

On the one hand it is reasonable to argue that that thesis should be accepted which can be shown to be the most conducive to progress in theoretical physics so far. In the next section I will demonstrate that this picks out the relatively specific and contentful thesis of physicalismwith N = 1.

On the other hand, however, it is reasonable to argue that that thesis should be accepted which has the least content that is just sufficient to exclude the empirically successful disunified theories that current methods of physics do exclude. We have almost no grounds for holding that any version of physicalism is true, or is more likely to be true than some other version. Whatever we choose, we are very likely to choose a thesis that is false. Our best bet, then, is to choose that thesis which has the least possible content which suffices to exclude those disunified theories that are excluded from physics, since the less the content of a thesis-other things being equal-the more likely it is to be true. As we shall see in section 5.6 below, this leads to a choice quite different from physicalism