has used the term "physicalism" to stand for the view that the world is made up entirely of physical entities of the kind postulated by fundamental physical theorieselectrons, quarks and so on. As I am using the term, "physicalism" stands for the very much stronger doctrine that the universe is physically comprehensible, that it is such that some yetto-be-discovered, unified "theory of everything" is true. 16. For much more detailed arguments for accepting metaphysical theses at levels 7 to 3, see Maxwell (2017a, ch. 9). 17. This talk of "justifying" may seem thoroughly un-Popperian in character, but it is not. What is at issue is not the justification of the truth, or probable truth, of some thesis, but only the justification of accepting the thesis (granted our aim is truth). Within Popper's falsificationism, there is just such a "justification" for accepting highly falsifiable (and unfalsified) theories: such theories, being most vulnerable to falsification, facilitate the discovery of error, and thus give the most hope of progress (towards truth). Acceptance of such theories is justified (according to falsificationism) because it promotes error detection and progress. This Popperian justification justifies acceptance of that theory most likely to false! Nothing could demonstrate more starkly that justifying acceptance (in the interest of discovering truth) is not at all the same thing as justifying the truth of a theory or proposition. 18. For further details of how AOE overcomes the two difficulties indicated earlier in this chapter, and for further details of the view itself, see; and especially 2017a). 19. For a more detailed rebuttal of this objection, see, ch. 5). 21. Elsewhere I have suggested an alternative to physicalism (see2017b, ch. 5, section 10). 22. In holding that metaphysical theses and philosophies of science are an integral part of science itself, AOE implies that Popper's principle of demarcation) is to be rejected. Popper's demarcation proposal, apart from being untenable, is in any case too simplistic, in that it reduces to one a number of distinct demarcation issues. Popper rolls into one the distinct tasks of demarcating (a) good from bad science, (b) science from non-science, (c) science from pseudoscience, (d) rational from irrational inquiry, (e) knowledge from mere speculation, (f) knowledge from dogma (or superstition, or prejudice, or popular belief), (g) the empirical from the metaphysical, and (h) factual truth from non-factual (analytic) truth. (a) to (d) involve demarcating between disciplines, whereas (e) to (h) involve demarcating between propositions. 23. For a very much more detailed exposition of this solution to the problem of simplicity, together with an account of the way in which great unifying theories of physics illustrate the solution, see, ch. 5). 24. For a more detailed discussion of the solution to the problem of verisimilitude, see Maxwell (2017a, ch. 8). 25. It may be objected that if T is assumed to be the true unified theory of everything, no meaning can be given to the idea that theoretical physics is making progress, by means of a succession of false theories, to a more or less disunified theory of everything. But T does not need to be assumed to be unified; all that is required is that T is such that the notion of "partial derivation" from T makes sense. For further discussion of the inability of any standard empiricist view such as falsificationism to solve the problem of verisimilitude, and the ability of AOE to solve the problem, see Maxwell (1998, pp. 70-2, 211-17 and 226-7). 26. For further discussion of the method of discovery provided by AOE, see; and especially 2017b, ch. 5). 27. Thus one of the aims of geology is to improve knowledge about how and when specific rock strata have been formed-knowledge about the history of a particular object, the Earth. This is very different from the aims of theoretical physics, in seeking to discover the unified laws that govern all phenomena. The aims of evolutionary biology, again, have a historical aspect to them, and are thus quite different from the aims of theoretical physics. 28. Chemistry presupposes quantum theory. Thus an item (quantum theory) that is a component of level 2 as far as physics is concerned, is a high-level presupposition as far as chemistry is concerned, implicit in the basic aims of theoretical chemistry. In short, what is low down in the hierarchy for physics, is high up in the hierarchy for chemistry. 29. For more on the implications of AOE for scientific method, see30. This theme is developed in my "Unification and Revolution: A Paradigm for Paradigms" (Maxwell, 2014a). 31. See Maxwell (2014a) for further criticisms of Kuhn, especially in connection with "incommensurability", and for suggestions as to how Kuhn's view can be modified to move it in the direction of AOE. 32. The phrase "underlying dynamic unity in nature", I hope it is clear, is to be interpreted as appealing to the thesis that the universe is such that there is a yet-to-be-discovered, physical "theory of everything" that is both unified and true. 33. See Lakatos