Newton in a sense agreed, as is indicated by his remark:

That gravity should be innate, inherent and essential to matter, so that one body may act upon another, at a distance through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else  is to me so great an absurdity, that I believe no man who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking can ever fall into it.The impossibility of interpreting the law of gravitation in terms of the corpuscular hypothesis, in terms of action-by-contact, led Newton to interpret the law instrumentalistically, as specifying the way bodies move without providing any kind of explanation for the motion, in terms of unobservable forces. Subsequently, however, Boscovich and others were able to conceive of a metaphysical view more appropriate to Newton's new theory, according to which nature is made up of point particles, with mass, each point particle being surrounded by a rigid, spherically symmetric, centrally directed field of force which varies with distance. Reject the corpuscular hypothesis and adopt, instead, this new Boscovichean metaphysics, and Newton's theory ceases to be incomprehensible, and becomes the very model of comprehensibility.

Another example is provided by James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electrodynamics. Maxwell himself, and most of his contemporaries and immediate successors, sought to interpret the electromagnetic field in terms of a material substratum, the hypothetical aether, itself to be understood in Newtonian terms. A tremendous amount of effort was put into trying to understand Maxwell's field equations in terms of the aether. Faraday, who appreciated that one should take the electromagnetic field as a new kind of physical entity, and explain matter in terms of the field rather than try to explain the field in terms of a kind of hypothetical matter (the aether), was ignored. The unrealistic character, and ultimate failure, of mechanical models of the electromagnetic field led many to hold that the real nature of the field must remain a mystery. The most that one could hope for from Maxwell's equations, it seemed, was the successful prediction of observable phenomena associated with electromagnetism. This instrumentalistic attitude remained even after the advent of Einstein's special theory of relativity in 1905, which might be interpreted as giving credence to the idea that it is the field that is fundamental. Gradually, however, Einstein and others came to adopt the view that one should see the field as a new kind of physical entity, quite distinct from corpuscle and point particle.

There are two lessons to be learned from these episodes, one for quantum theory specifically, the other for theoretical physics in general. In the first place, quantum theory, if fundamentally probabilistic, needs to be formulated as a theory about fundamentally probabilistic physical entities-propensitons-however weird these may seem given our common sense and classical intuitions. We require a fully microrealistic version of quantum theory which, though testable, says nothing about "observables" or "measurement" in the basic postulates of the theory at all. Second, if theoretical physics is to free itself from the obstructive tendency to interpret new theories in terms of old, inappropriate metaphysics, physicists need to recognize that metaphysical ideas are inevitably an integral part of theoretical physics, and need to be developed and improved in the light of new theoretical developments. In previous chapters I have argued that, in order to construe science as a rational enterprise, we need to see physics as making a hierarchy of metaphysical assumptions concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe, these assumptions becoming increasingly insubstantial, and thus increasingly likely to be true, as we ascend the hierarchy. 8 According to this "aim-oriented empiricist" view, this hierarchy creates a framework of reasonably secure, permanent assumptions (and associated methods) high up in the hierarchy, within which much more specific, substantial and fallible assumptions (and associated methods), low down in the hierarchy, can be revised and improved. If ever the physics community came to accept and put into scientific practice this aim-oriented empiricist methodology, then the best available metaphysical ideas might lead the way to the discovery of new physical theories, instead of obstructing interpretation and understanding of theories that have been discovered (and thus also obstructing the discovery of new theories). In one exceptional case in the history of physics, the new metaphysics came first, led the way, and actually made possible the subsequent discovery of the new theory. This happened when Einstein discovered general relativity. Einstein first hit upon the metaphysical idea that gravitation is due to the curvature of space-time, and then subsequently discovered how to capture this idea precisely in the field equations of general relativity. In stark contrast to the cases of Newtonian theory, Maxwellian classical electrodynamics and quantum theory, general relativity was discovered as a result of the prior development of new appropriate metaphysics, instead of the discovery of the new theory, if anything, being obstructed by current metaphysical ideas, the theory being misunderstood and misinterpreted by such ideas, once discovered. That Einstein's discovery of general relativity should stand out in this way is not, in my view, surprising: in Chapter 3 I argued that Einstein both put into practice, and upheld, a conception of science close to that of aim-oriented empiricism.