3.3 Einstein's discovery of general relativity

Aim-oriented empiricism is even more explicit in Einstein's discovery of general relativity. Einstein exploits the same method of discovery. As before, there are two fundamental conflicting theories: Newton's theory of gravitation (T 1 ) and special relativity (T 2 ). These conflict because whereas Newton's theory implies that gravitational influences travel instantaneously, special relativity implies that such influences cannot travel faster than light. As before, Einstein searches for new principles that will guide him to a new unifying theory. His first step is to notice that there is a principle implicit in Newton's theory of gravitation (P 1 ) which, if generalized (P 1 *), makes it possible to generalize and improve the principle of relativity basic to special relativity (P 2 ). This latter principle seemed unsatisfactory to Einstein because of its restriction to some arbitrarily selected set of inertial reference frames all in uniform motion with respect to each other. Much more satisfactory would be a general principle of relativity (P 2 *) which asserts that the laws of nature have the same form in all reference frames, however they may be moving or accelerating with respect to each other. But this general principle of relativity seems impossible to implement. It is one thing to say, given a train moving uniformly through a station, that there are two equivalent descriptions: (1) train moving, platform at rest; and (2) train at rest, platform moving (in the opposite direction). It is quite another to say, given that the train crashes into the buffers at the end of the station, that there are two equivalent descriptions: (1) train de-accelerates, platform remains unaccelerated; and (2) train remains unaccelerated, platform de-accelerates. These are not equivalent descriptions: in the first, it is people in the train that suffer from violent de-acceleration, whereas in the second it is people on the platform that suffer. But consider now the following remarkable feature of Newton's law of gravitation (P 1 ): in a uniform gravitational field all objects accelerate equally, whatever their mass (essentially because inertial and gravitational mass are equal). Generalize this to form the principle of equivalence (P 1 *): no local phenomenon distinguishes between (a) uniform acceleration, and (b) being at rest in a uniform gravitational field. Whatever effect a gravitational field has on some phenomenon, it is the same as the effect that the equivalent acceleration would have in the absence of gravitation. This immediately has two consequences. First, it allows us to hold that all frames, however accelerating, are equivalent, as long as, in moving from one frame to another accelerating with respect to the first, we can invoke an additional, compensating gravitational field. Thus, in the case of the crashing train we have: (1) train de-accelerates, platform remains stationary; (2) train remains stationary, platform de-accelerates, and a gravitational field exists momentarily to compensate precisely for this deacceleration. In both cases, it is the people in the train who suffer: according to the first description, because of de-acceleration; according to the second, because of the sudden gravitational field (and no compensating de-acceleration, as on the platform). The generalized principle of equivalence (P 1 *) makes it possible, in this way, to hold the generalized principle of relativity (P 2 *). The second consequence of the generalized principle of equivalence (P 1 *) is that, if correct, it enables us to discover the effects that uniform gravitational fields have on phenomena; all we need to do is to consider the effects of uniform acceleration and put these equal to the effects of the corresponding gravitational field in the absence of acceleration. The principle of equivalence (P 1 *) thus has great potential heuristic power for the discovery of the new theory of gravitation, to replace Newtonian theory.According to special relativity, acceleration affects geometry. Consider a flat, rapidly rotating disc. A rigid rod, of length L at the centre of the disc will, according to special relativity, only have length L(l-v 2 / c 2 ) 1/ 2 at the circumference, given that it is aligned with the motion of rotation which, at the circumference, has the value v. The geometry of the disc, as determined within a reference frame that is not rotating, will be non-Euclidean.Uniform circular motion is accelerated motion. But if acceleration affects geometry, so, too, by the principle of equivalence, must gravitation. We have the possibility that gravitation is the (non-Euclidean) curvature of space-time-a possibility which, if true, would bring about a tremendous conceptual unification in the foundations of physics (namely the unification of gravitation and space-time geometry). Postulate therefore that gravitation is indeed the curvature of space-time. The presence of matter curves space-time; and matter moves along geodesics in this curved space-time. Curved space-time can always be reduced to flat Minkowskian space-time in any infinitesimal region by an appropriate choice of coordinate system, in accordance with the principle of equivalence given its final local formulation (P 1 **). What remains to be done is to formulate the precise way in which energy-momentum aects the Riemannian curvature of space-time.