

But rigour demands that assumptions that are substantial, influential, problematic and implicit need to be made explicit, so that they can be critically assessed, so that alternatives can be developed and considered, the hope being that in this way such assumptions can be improved. Thus rigour demands that science makes explicit, and so criticizable and improvable, the substantial, problematic, influential and implicit assumption that the universe, or the phenomena, are such that all disunified theories are false. This assumption, M, can easily be shown to be metaphysical, as follows. Persistent acceptance of theories unified in ways

involves rejecting infinitely many empirically more successful disunified rivals, T 1 , T 2 , … T ∞ , because they clash with M. In effect, M = notT 1 and notT 2 … and notT ∞. In order to verify M we would need to falsify all of T 1 , T 2 , … and T ∞ , but as there are infinitely many theories, this cannot be done. In order to falsify M we need to verify just one of T 1 , T 2 , … or T ∞ , but physical theories cannot be verified. Hence M, being neither verifiable nor falsifiable, is metaphysical. It is a permanent metaphysical assumption of science-permanent, at least, as long as all theories disunified in senses

are rejected whatever their empirical success might be.

At once the question arises: how is this assumption M to be critically assessed and, perhaps, improved? In Chapter 2 I argued that once the metaphysical assumption implicit in persistent preference in science for unified theories is acknowledged, it becomes apparent that we need to adopt a new conception of science, which construes science as making a hierarchy of such assumptions, these assumptions asserting less and less as one goes up the hierarchy, and thus becoming more and more likely to be true.These are assumptions about the knowability and comprehensibility of the universe. As we descend the hierarchy, assumptions become more substantial and specific, and much more likely to be false, and in need of revision. Revision is, however, kept as low down in the hierarchy as possible. Those physical theories are accepted which best accord with the evidence and the best available metaphysical assumption, B, say, lowest down in the hierarchy. But B may itself be revised if a rival assumption, B*, is developed which (a) is compatible with the assumption above it in the hierarchy, and (b) supports an empirical research programme that is more successful than the one supported by B. Relatively problematic assumptions high up in the hierarchy thus form a fixed framework within which much more specific, problematic assumptions can be revised in the light of empirical success and failure. As knowledge improves, assumptions and associated methods improve as well; there is something like positive feedback between improving knowledge and improving knowledge-about-how-to-improve-knowledge, the methodological key to the success of modern science. Non-empirical requirements for theory acceptance, corresponding to metaphysical assumptions, improve with improving knowledge. Newton's requirements of simplicity evolve into the symmetry principles of modern physics. For my view as to how acceptance of the hierarchy of metaphysical assumptions is to be justified, see Chapter 7 (see also

Scientific metaphysics

5.1 Introduction

The idea that science cannot proceed without the assumption that the universe is comprehensible in some way-the thesis that it is physically comprehensible being a more secure item of knowledge than any accepted physical theory-represents a profound and dramatic revolution in our whole conception of science. It is perhaps not surprising that, even though this idea dates back at least to 1974, 1 and has been expounded and argued for in considerable detail on a number of occasions since, 2 nevertheless, at the time of writing

, few scientists or philosophers of science have taken note of, or responded to the arguments for, this revolutionary view.Given the momentous consequences of the idea, and its neglect, it seems to me appropriate to reformulate, in as careful and critical a way as I can, the central argument for aimoriented empiricism. The argument developed in this chapter improves on the earlier versions, to be found in Chapters 2 and 4.

I argue, first, that persistent acceptance of (more or less) unified fundamental dynamic theories in physics, even though endlessly many empirically more successful disunified rivals are always available, means that physics makes a persistent untestable (or metaphysical) assumption about the nature of the universe: it is such that some yetto-be-discovered, more or less unified physical theory is true, and all seriously disunified theories are false. I then invoke the account of what it means to assert of a physical theory that it is unified, developed in the last chapter, to throw light on the question of what physics does, and ought to, assume in assuming that some more or less unified theory is true. This provides us with a way of classifying-indeed, of partially ordering-all metaphysical theses which assert that the universe possesses some kind of comprehensive, more or less disunified dynamic structure-the universe being more or less physically comprehensible, in other words.