

1.6 The Poverty of Historicism

The general doctrine of historicism is expounded and criticized by Popper in his The Poverty of Historicism (P.H.), first published in three parts in Economica in 1944 and 1945 (somewhat before O.S.E.) and only published in book form in 1957. Popper divides historicist views and arguments into two classes: those that hold that the methods of the social and natural sciences are quite different (the "anti-naturalist doctrines") and those that hold they are the same or similar (the "pro-naturalist doctrines").

Anti-naturalist doctrines can be summarized like this. Generalizations, experiments, predictions and understanding have roles in social science that are radically different from those they have in physics. Social phenomena exhibit novelty, complexity and a holistic aspect that is lacking in physical phenomena. These differences ensure that historicist social science, predicting in more or less rough outline the evolution of society, must employ methods that differ from those of natural science.

Pro-naturalist doctrines of historicism make much of the success of long-term predictions in astronomy. Just as states of the solar system can be predicted by natural science far into the future, so too historicist social science ought to be able to predict states of society far into the future. Such predictions will, however, employ social laws of succession, laws which specify how one characteristic phase of social development gives way to a subsequent phase.

Popper effectively criticizes the anti-naturalist doctrines of historicism. It is, however, Popper's criticism of the pro-naturalist standpoint that is the really important nub of the book. Historicist laws of succession are not laws at all, as these are understood in physics. They are trends. And "trends are not laws". A law provides a causal explanation of an event when the law plus initial conditions imply that the event occurs. Whenever a succession of causally connected events occurs in our environment, such as the wind shaking a tree and causing an apple to fall to the ground, laws (usually a number of quite different laws) plus the specification of a sequence of initial conditions are required to predict the sequence of events. Trends can, then, be explained by means of laws, but it is always laws plus relevant initial conditions which provide such explanations. And the crucial point is that, given some trend, in particular a social trend, initial conditions that must continue to exist if the trend is to continue are likely to be very many indeed, most of which will be easy to overlook. This ensures that trends, such as the growth of a population, which have persisted for centuries, may quite suddenly cease if some condition, necessary for the persistence of the trend, ceases to exist. "The poverty of historicism", Popper declares "is a poverty of imagination" (ibid., p. 130)-the poverty of being unable to imagine that conditions, necessary for the persistence of some trend, might suddenly themselves change. And this is highly relevant to the whole idea of piecemeal social engineering, for the piecemeal engineer may seek to change just such conditions, required for the persistence of some undesirable trend.

1.7 At the LSE

In 1945 Popper was appointed to a readership in logic and scientific method at the London School of Economics (LSE); he took up the appointment in 1946, and was promoted to a personal professorship in 1949. Initially the only philosopher at the LSE, Popper was subsequently joined by J. O. Wisdom in 1948, Joseph Agassi in 1957 (who left in 1960), John Watkins in 1958, W. W.. The Department at the LSE was famous for Popper's weekly seminar. Notoriously, visiting speakers rarely succeeded in concluding the announcement of the title of their talk before being interrupted by Popper. He subjected each speaker to a devastating critical attack, almost sentence by sentence; quite often, the subject of the seminar would be continued a week later. The seminars were always dramatic, sometimes farcical, but nevertheless created an overwhelming impression of Popper's passionate determination to get at the truth, even if conventions of politeness and good manners had to be sacrificed.

1.8 Conjectures and Refutations

In 1963 Popper published Conjectures and Refutations (C.R.), a collection of essays restating, extending and applying his views on scientific method, philosophy and rationality. This is perhaps the best introduction to Popper's work. Here is a quick survey of some of the items in the book.

In the Introduction Popper makes a number of important epistemological points. He notes the widespread tendency to believe in the false doctrine that truth is manifest-readily available and easy to come by. When truth turns out not to be so easy to obtain, epistemological optimists become pessimists, and deny that knowledge is possible at all, or resort to conspiracy theories to account for the inaccessibility of the truth. Both Descartes and Bacon are famous for their anti-authoritarian stance in epistemological matters; and yet, Popper points out, there is an unnoticed implicit authoritarianism in their views. For Bacon, and for the empiricists who followed him, the senses are authoritative sources of knowledge; for Descartes, and for the rationalists who followed him, reason is the authoritative source of knowledge. Popper, of course, argues against the idea that conjectural knowledge has any authoritative source.