I make no apology, therefore, for criticizing science, for attempting to contribute to and improve science, in what follows. Philosophy of science pursued within the framework of aim-oriented empiricism might be compared to the work Weierstrass, Dedekind and others did in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century in bringing greater rigour to mathematics: they made mathematics more rigorous, and contributed to mathematics itself, at one and the same time. Somewhat analogously, I seek to increase the rigour of science, and make a contribution to science at the same time. I might add that in criticizing science and suggesting how it might be improved (made more rigorous and of greater human value) I am again developing a tendency to be found scattered among Popper's works. Despite-or perhaps because of-his great admiration for science at its best, Popper does not shrink from criticizing what he sees as deplorable aspects of science: specialization, authoritarianism, submission to mere intellectual fashion, failure to grapple with the fundamental problems of cosmology. Again, Popper depicts graphically some of the bad consequences, for science itself, of attempting to put bad inductivist methods into scientific practice. But all this is paradoxically at odds with a major tenet of Popper's philosophy of science, namely his proposed solution to the problem of demarcation. Popper holds that an idea, in order to be scientific, must be empirically falsifiable. Philosophies of science, because they are not empirically falsifiable, are not a part of science. They are to be severely demarcated from science. Thus Popper, in actively criticizing aspects of science, violates the precepts of his own philosophy of science. All this changes dramatically once Popper's philosophy of science has been amended to become the doctrine espoused here, aim-oriented empiricism.The points just made concerning the proper relationship between science on the one hand and the philosophy of science on the other, will turn out to have a major bearing on further developments of the argument concerning social inquiry. I argue that social inquiry needs to be construed, not primarily as social science, but rather as social philosophy or social methodology. Social inquiry is not to be related to the social world as astronomy is to the moon, or geology is to the earth. Social inquiry is not, fundamentally, engaged in seeking to acquire knowledge about social phenomena. Rather, social inquiry needs to take the relationship between science and the philosophy of science (as specified by aim-oriented empiricism) to be the model, the ideal, of how social inquiry ought to be related to society. What the philosophy of science is to science, so social inquiry is to society. The proper task of social inquiry is to help worthwhile social endeavours improve their problematic aims and methods as they proceed, just as the proper task of the philosophy of science is to help science improve its problematic aims and methods as it proceeds. On this view, indeed, the philosophy of natural science is just that small, but crucial, bit of social inquiry that deals with the worthwhile social endeavour of natural science.

Let me now indicate, in a little more detail, the contents of the chapters of this book.

Chapter 1 gives an account of Karl Popper's life and work. I make it quite clear that, in my view, Popper is the greatest philosopher of the twentieth century. I am nevertheless critical of aspects of his work-it would be a betrayal of his "critical philosophy" not to be. In a preliminary way, I indicate what are, in my view, unsolved problems inherent in his views, and outline what needs to be done to overcome these difficulties. Subsequent chapters seek to improve Popper's philosophy in some key respects in order to overcome these defects.

In Chapter 2 I argue that aim-oriented empiricism is a kind of synthesis of the views of Popper, Thomas Kuhn and Imre Lakatos, but also a dramatic improvement over all three views. Aim-oriented empiricism stands in sharp contrast to standard empiricism, versions of which are defended by Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos, and are taken for granted by most scientists and philosophers of science. According to standard empiricism, the basic intellectual aim of science is truth,and the basic method is to assess claims to knowledge of truth impartially with respect to evidence. Considerations of simplicity, unity or explanatory character may legitimately influence preference for a theory for a time, but not in such a way that the universe itself is permanently presumed to be simple, unified or comprehensible. Choice of theory may be biased in the direction of a paradigm or metaphysical view for a time, but in the end empirical considerations must decide what theories are accepted and rejected. The key tenet of all versions of standard empiricism is that no assumption about the universe can be accepted permanently as a part of scientific knowledge independent of evidence, let alone in conflict with evidence. But physics, in accepting unified fundamental physical theories only, and persistently rejecting empirically more successful disunified rivals, does thereby make a persistent metaphysical assumption about the world: some kind of unified pattern of physical law runs through all phenomena. Standard empiricism is thus untenable. Aim-oriented empiricism, by contrast, acknowledges that persistent scientific acceptance of unified theories means that science implicitly accepts that the universe itself possesses some kind of underlying unity. Rigour demands that this highly problematic, implicit metaphysical conjecture be made explicit, so that it can be critically assessed, and so that alternatives can be developed and assessed, in the hope of improving the specific assumption that physics makes at any time. Aim-oriented empiricism holds that we need to represent this highly problematic assumption in the form of a hierarchy of assumptions, these becoming less and less substantial, and so less and less problematic, and more nearly such that their truth is required for science to be possible at all, as one goes up the hierarchy. In this way, we form a framework of relatively stable and unproblematic assumptions, high up in the hierarchy, within which much more substantial and problematic assumptions, low down in the hierarchy, may be critically assessed, and improved, in the light of which best help promote empirical knowledge, and comply with assumptions higher up in the hierarchy. This is the view that provides a triumphant synthesis of, and improvement over, the views of Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos-more Popperian than Popper, more Kuhnian than Kuhn and more Lakatosian than Lakatos.