2.6 Aim-oriented empiricism: an improvement over falsificationism AOE is also, in a number of ways, a considerable improvement over Popper's falsificationism:

1. Consistency. Bare falsificationism fails dramatically to do justice to scientific practice, and is an inherently unworkable methodology, in any case. (In what follows I shall mostly ignore bare falsificationism as obviously untenable, and concentrate on comparing dressed falsificationism and AOE.) Dressed falsificationism does better justice to scientific practice, but at the cost of consistency; persistent rejection of empirically successful theories that do not "proceed from some simple  unifying idea" commits science to accepting a metaphysical thesis of simplicity as a part of scientific knowledge (though this is not recognized); this contradicts Popper's demarcation principle. AOE is free of such lethal defects.

2. Criticism. Pursuing physics in accordance with dressed falsificationism protects the implicit metaphysical thesis of simplicity from criticism within science itself, just because this thesis is metaphysical (and therefore not a part of science) and implicit (and therefore not available for sustained, explicit critical scrutiny). AOE, by contrast, is specifically designed to provide a framework of metaphysical assumptions and corresponding methodological rules within which level 3 metaphysical blueprints may be developed, and critically assessed, within science.

3. Rigour. Science pursued in accordance with AOE is more rigorous than science pursued in accordance with falsificationism. An elementary, but important requirement for rigour is that assumptions that are substantial, influential, problematic and implicit need to be made explicit so that they can be criticized, and so that alternatives can be considered.

If the attempt is made to do science in accordance with falsificationism, bare or dressed, one substantial, influential and problematic assumption must remain implicit (as we have just seen), namely the metaphysical assumption that nature behaves as if simple or unified, no ad hoc theory being true. This is implicit in the adoption of the methodological simplicity principle of dressed falsificationism. AOE, by contrast, makes this implicit assumption explicit, and provides a framework within which rival versions can be proposed and critically assessed.

4. Simplicity. Falsificationism fails to say what the simplicity of a theory is. Bare falsificationism provides an account of simplicity in terms of falsifiability, but we have already seen that this account is untenable."requirement of simplicity" appeals to a conception of simplicity or unity that is wholly in addition to falsifiability, but does not explain what the simplicity or unity of a theory is. It fails to explain how the simplicity of a theory can possibly be methodologically or epistemologically significant when a simple theory can always be made complex by a suitable change of terminology, and vice versa. Popper himself recognized the inadequacy of his simplicity requirement when he called it "a bit vague", said that "it seems difficult to formulate it very clearly" and acknowledged that it threatened to involve one in an infinite regressBy contrast, AOE solves the problems of explaining what the simplicity or unity of a theory is without difficulty, as we shall see in Chapter 4. Put very briefly, in order to be unified, a physical theory must be such that its content, what it asserts about the world, must be the same throughout all the phenomena to which the theory applies. If the content of a physical theory, T, splits into N distinct regions, so that the content of any one region is different from what it is in all the others, then T is disunified to degree N. For perfect unity we require N = 1. Because what matters is content, not form, the way T is formulated is irrelevant to this way of assessing simplicity or unity. Falsificationism cannot avail itself of this way of assessing unity because to do so makes it abundantly clear that acceptance of unified theories only, in this sense of "unified", when endlessly many empirically more successful disunified rivals are available, involves making a persistent metaphysical assumption about the nature of the universe. Within AOE, there is a second way in which the unity of T may be assessed: in terms of the extent to which the content of T exemplifies the best available level 3 metaphysical blueprint. This second conception of simplicity or unity evolves with the evolution of level 3 ideas. As we improve our ideas about how the universe is unified, with the advance of knowledge in theoretical physics, so non-empirical methods for selecting theories on the basis of simplicity or unity improve as well. Thus current symmetry principles of modern physics, such as Lorentz invariance and gauge invariance, which guide acceptance of theory, are an advance over simplicity criteria upheld by Newton.Ultimately, as we shall see in Chapter 4, requirements of theoretical unity, as these apply in physics, need to be applied to the totality of fundamental physical theory in physics, and not to individual theories.

5. Scientific method. Dressed falsificationism acknowledges (correctly) that two considerations govern selection of theory in science, namely considerations that have to do with (a) evidence, and (b) simplicity. But because it cannot solve the problem of what simplicity is, dressed falsificationism cannot, with any precision, specify what methods are involved when theories are selected on the basis of simplicity. Nor can the view do justice to the way in which the methods of physics evolve with evolving knowledge, especially methods that assert that acceptable theories must satisfy this or that symmetry. In other words, falsificationism fails to solve what may be called the "methodological" problem of induction: the problem of specifying, merely, what the methods are that are employed by science in accepting and rejecting theories (leaving aside the further problem of justifying these methods given that the aim is to acquire knowledge). AOE, by contrast, solves the problem of simplicity, and thus can specify precisely what methods are involved when theories are selected on the basis of simplicity or unity. Furthermore, AOE can do justice to evolving criteria of simplicity (as we have just seen), and hence evolving methods. According to AOE, the totality of fundamental physical theory, T, can be assessed (i) by considering the extent to which its content is unified, and thus exemplifies the fixed level 4 thesis of physicalism, or (ii) by considering the extent to which its content exemplifies the evolving, best available level 3 thesis. Whereas (i) constitutes a fixed criterion of unity (as long as physicalism is not modified), (ii) constitutes an evolving criterion, a criterion of unity that improves with improving knowledge.