

The biggest change, in moving from falsificationism to AOE, has to do with the role of metaphysics in science, and the scope of scientific knowledge. According to falsificationism, untestable metaphysical theses may influence scientific research in the context of discovery, and may even lead to metaphysical research programmes; they cannot, however, be a part of scientific knowledge itself. But according to AOE, the metaphysical theses at levels 3 to 7 are all a part of current (conjectural) scientific knowledge. In particular, physicalism is. According to AOE, it is a part of current (conjectural) scientific knowledge that the universe is physically comprehensible-certainly not the case granted falsificationism.

Another important change has to do with the relationship between science and the philosophy of science. Falsificationism places the study of scientific method, the philosophy of science, outside science itself, in accordance with Popper's demarcation principle. AOE, by contrast, makes scientific method and the philosophy of science an integral part of science itself. The activity of tackling problems inherent in the aims of science, at a variety of levels, and of developing new possible aims and methods, new possible more specific or less specific philosophies of science (views about what the aims and methods of science ought to be) is, according to AOE, a vital research activity of science itself. But this is also philosophy of science, being carried on within the framework of AOE.AOE differs in many other important ways from Popper's falsificationism (see chapter. Nevertheless the impulse, the intellectual aspirations and values, behind the hierarchical view of AOE are, as I have tried to indicate, thoroughly Popperian in character and spirit. The whole idea is to turn implicit assumptions into explicit conjectures in such a way that criticism may be directed at what most needs to be criticized from the standpoint of aiding progress in knowledge, so that conjectures may be developed and adopted that are the most fruitful in promoting scientific progress, at the same time no substantial conjecture, implicit or explicit, being held immune from critical scrutiny.10.6 The New Enlightenment, step (ii): from critical to aim-oriented rationalism Falsificationism is defective because it fails to identify the problematic aim of science properly, and thus fails to specify the need for science to improve its aims and methods as it proceeds. Critical rationalism is defective in an analogous way. It does not make improving aims and methods, when aims are problematic, an essential aspect of rationality.

If, however, we take AOE as our starting point, and generalize that, the outcome is different. It is not just in science that aims are problematic; 29 this is the case in life too, either because different aims conflict, or because what we believe to be desirable and realizable lacks one or other of these features, or both. Above all, the aim of creating global civilization is inherently and profoundly problematic. Furthermore, it is not just science that "represses" problematic aims (see); many other institutional and traditional endeavours repress problematic aims and acknowledge ostensibly unproblematic, token aims instead. Quite generally, then, and not just in science, whenever we pursue a problematic aim we need first to acknowledge the aim; then we need to represent it as a hierarchy of aims, from the specific and problematic at the bottom of the hierarchy, to the general and unproblematic at the top. In this way we provide ourselves with a framework within which we may improve more or less specific and problematic aims and methods as we proceed, learning from success and failure in practice what it is that is both of most value and realizable. Such an "aim-oriented" conception of rationality is the proper generalization of the aim-oriented, progress-achieving methods of science.Any conception of rationality which systematically leads us astray must be defective. But any conception of rationality, such as Popper's critical rationalism, which does not include explicit instructions for the improvement of aims, must systematically lead us astray. It will do so whenever we fail to choose that aim that is in our best interests or, more seriously, whenever we misrepresent our aim-as we are likely to do whenever aims are problematic. In these circumstances, the more "rationally" we pursue the aim we acknowledge, the worse off we will be. Systematically, such conceptions of rationality, which do not include provisions for improving problematic aims, are a hinderance rather than a help; they are, in short, defective.AOE and its generalization, aim-oriented rationality (AOR), incorporate all the good points of Popper's falsificationist conception of science and its generalization, critical rationalism, indicated above, but also improve on Popper's notions, in being designed to help science and other worthwhile endeavours progressively improve problematic aims and methods.

10.7 The New Enlightenment, step (iii): from knowledge to wisdom I come now to step (iii) of the New Enlightenment Programme. The task, here, is to help humanity gradually get more AOR into diverse aspects of social and institutional life-personal, political, economic, educational, international-so that humanity may gradually learn how to make progress towards an enlightened world. Social inquiry, in taking up this task, needs to be pursued as social methodology or social philosophy. What the philosophy of science is to science, as conceived by AOE, so sociology is to the social world: it has the task of helping diverse valuable human endeavours and institutions gradually improve aims and methods so that the world may make social progress towards global enlightenment. (The sociology of science, as a special case, is one and the same thing as the philosophy of science.) And a basic task of academic inquiry, more generally, becomes to help humanity solve its problems of living in increasingly rational, cooperative, enlightened ways, thus helping humanity become more civilized. The basic aim of academic inquiry becomes, as I have already said, to promote the growth of wisdom. Those parts of academic inquiry devoted to improving knowledge, understanding and technological know-how contribute to the growth of wisdom. The New Enlightenment Programme thus has dramatic and far-reaching implications for academic inquiry, for almost every branch and aspect of science and the humanities, for its overall character and structure, its overall aims and methods, and its relationship to the rest of the social world. I have spelled out in some detail what these implications are in a number of publications.