

It is important to appreciate that the conception of academic inquiry that we are considering is designed to help us to see, to know and to understand, for their own sake, just as much as it is designed to help us solve practical problems of living. It might seem that social inquiry, in articulating problems of living and proposing possible solutions, has only a severely practical purpose. But engaging in this intellectual activity of articulating personal and social problems of living is just what we need to do if we are to develop a good empathic or "personalistic" understanding of our fellow human beings (and of ourselves)-a kind of understanding that can do justice to our humanity, to what is of value, potentially and actually, in our lives. In order to understand another person as a person (as opposed to a biological or physical system) I need to be able, in imagination, to see, desire, fear, believe, experience and suffer what the other person sees, desires, etc. I need to be able, in imagination, to enter into the other person's world; that is, I need to be able to understand his problems of living as he understands them, and I need also, perhaps, to understand a more objective version of these problems. In giving intellectual priority to the tasks of articulating problems of living and exploring possible solutions, social inquiry thereby gives intellectual priority to the development of a kind of understanding that people can acquire of one another that is of great intrinsic value. In my view, indeed, personalistic understanding is essential to the development of our humanity, even to the development of consciousness. Our being able to understand each other in this way is also essential for cooperatively rational action.

And it is essential for science. It is only because scientists can enter imaginatively into each other's problems and research projects that objective scientific knowledge can develop. At least two rather different motives exist for trying to see the world as another sees it: one may seek to improve one's knowledge of the other person; or one may seek to improve one's knowledge of the world, it being possible that the other person has something to contribute to one's own knowledge. Scientific knowledge arises as a result of the latter use of personalistic understanding-scientific knowledge being, in part, the product of endless acts of personalistic understanding between scientists (with the personalistic element largely suppressed so that it becomes invisible). It is hardly too much to say that almost all that is of value in human life is based on personalistic understanding.The basic intellectual aim of the kind of inquiry we are considering is to devote reason to the discovery of what is of value in life. This immediately carries with it the consequence that the arts have a vital rational contribution to make to inquiry, as revelations of value, as imaginative explorations of possibilities, desirable or disastrous, or as vehicles for the criticism of fraudulent values through comedy, satire or tragedy. Literature and drama also have a rational role to play in enhancing our ability to understand others personalistically, as a result of identifying imaginatively with fictional characters-literature in this respect merging into biography, documentary and history. Literary criticism bridges the gap between literature and social inquiry, and is more concerned with the content of literature than the means by which it achieves its effects.

Another important consequence flows from the point that the basic aim of inquiry is to help us discover what is of value, namely that our feelings and desires have a vital rational role to play within the intellectual domain of inquiry. If we are to discover for ourselves what is of value, then we must attend to our feelings and desires. But not everything that feels good is good, and not everything that we desire is desirable. Rationality requires that feelings and desires take fact, knowledge and logic into account, just as it requires that priorities for scientific research take feelings and desires into account. In insisting on this kind of interplay between feelings and desires on the one hand, knowledge and understanding on the other, the conception of inquiry that we are considering resolves the conflict between rationalism and romanticism, and helps us to acquire what we need if we are to contribute to building civilization: mindful hearts and heartfelt minds.

This, then, in bare outline, is the kind of academic inquiry that would have emerged from the eighteenth-century Enlightenment if the third great blunder of the Enlightenment had not been made.

But the blunder was made. Instead of the progress-achieving methods of science (generalized to become problem-solving rationality) being applied to social life, scientific method was applied to the task of developing social science alongside natural science. The outcome is what we have (by and large) today: a kind of inquiry that gives intellectual priority to the task of acquiring knowledge, this knowledge, once acquired, being subsequently and secondarily applied to help solve social problems. Rule 3 of problem-solving rationality is put into practice to splendid effect: the outcome is the maze of specialized disciplines of the formal, natural, social and technological sciences, and of scholarship, that go to make up much of academic inquiry today. But rules 1, 2 and 4 are violated. Academic inquiry today, restricted primarily to solving problems of knowledge, is so irrational, in a wholesale and structural way, that three of the four most elementary rules of reason conceivable are violated. Rule 1 is violated because academia can articulate problems of knowledge but cannot, at a fundamental level, articulate problems of living. Rule 2 is violated because academia can propose and critically assess possible solutions to problems of knowledge-theories, observational and experimental results, factual claims of all kinds-but cannot propose and critically assess possible solutions to problems of living-proposals for action, policies, political programmes, political philosophies, philosophies of life. All these latter do not state matters of fact; they embody proposals as to what we should do, how we should live, what we should seek to change and create; they incorporate such things as values, human hopes and fears, policies, strategies for living: they do not constitute potential contributions to knowledge, and are thus excluded from a kind of inquiry devoted to the pursuit of knowledge. Once rules 1 and 2 are violated, rule 4 is necessarily violated as well.