For Feyerabend's argument that severe testing requires the development of rival theories, see34. Granted Lakatos's overall view, the research programme of science cannot have a hard core, for then, in order to ensure Popperian severe testing, there would need to be a rival research programme with a rival hard core-and that would mean the original research programme was not the whole of science. Actually, Lakatos is not quite consistent here; after the sentence quoted in the text, Lakatos goes on: "Such methodological rules may be formulated, as Popper has pointed out, as metaphysical principles. For instance, the universal anti-conventionalist rule against exception-barring may be stated as the metaphysical principle: 'Nature does not allow exceptions' "That this admission is damaging for Popper's bare falsificationism was pointed out in note 12; it is equally damaging for Lakatos's version of Popperianism. 35. I say "not straightforwardly empirical" because both physicalism and the best available blueprint are themselves accepted on the grounds that they support a more empirically progressive research programme than any rival theses. Long-term empirical considerations influence choice of theses at levels 3 and 4, while at the same time these theses can lead to the rejection of potentially empirically successful theories that clash too severely with them (i.e. that are too severely ad hoc). 36. The Popperian and Lakatosian demand that theories be strictly universal, places weak but rigid constraints on what theories are acceptable; the demand of AOE that theories accord, as far as possible, with physicalism and the best available blueprint, places strong, but flexible and revisable constraints on what theories are acceptable. 37. For further details and discussion, see38. For an account of the discovery of parity non-conservation, and of the decisive character of the experiments refuting parity conservation, see Franklin (1990, pp. 6-3 6 and 151-2). See also Franklin (1986). 39. In order to preserve parity in the teeth of the experimental results, one would have had to argue that one or other auxiliary theory-quantum theory, the theory of weak interactions, the theory of nuclear structure or the theoretical description of the experiment-simply did not apply to this specific experiment. But to do that would have amounted to turning one or other of these auxiliary theories into a highly ad hoc, disunified theory-and that would clash with AOE. The requirement of overall theoretical unity (plus the experimental result) demanded that parity be rejected.

1. See Maxwell (1972a) for my criticisms of Popper which led me to develop aim-oriented empiricism. Seefor early attempts at employing aimoriented empiricism to solve the problem of induction. This is a theme which will be taken up in Chapter 7. Finally, seefor an account of how I came to develop aimoriented empiricism as a result of pondering problems faced by Popper's philosophy of science.

2. It may be asked how it is possible for Einstein to be the first to exploit aim-oriented empiricism explicitly in scientific practice if what I have argued in Chapter 2 is correct, and aim-oriented empiricism is inherent in all of science. The answer is straightforward. Actual scientific practice is massively influenced by the long-standing conviction of the scientific community that science ought to proceed in accordance with standard empiricism. The result is that scientific practice is a mixture of aim-oriented empiricism and standard empiricism. Aim-oriented empiricism is implemented in a surreptitious, hypocritical fashion, overlaid by the conviction that science ought to proceed in accordance with standard empiricism. As a result, physicalism and more specific metaphysical blueprints are not acknowledged within the intellectual domain of scientific knowledge, and this sabotages the possibility of putting the rational method of discovery of aim-oriented empiricism into sustained scientific practice. Explicit scientific exploitation of aim-oriented empiricism is frustrated if not prohibited.for further discussion of this point.) Einstein's great lucidity about fundamental matters led him to put aim-oriented empiricism into scientific practice unconstrained by hypocritical allegiance to standard empiricism. 3. Gerald Holton comes the closest to interpreting Einstein in the way that I do. One difference, of course, is that Holton espouses his "themata" conception of science and not aim-oriented empiricism (see, ch. 5, sections 5 and 6). 5. Einstein put it very clearly in a paper published in 1911. He states that as a result of assuming the equivalence of acceleration and gravitation for all phenomena "we obtain a principle that, if it really is correct, possesses great heuristic significance. For by means of theoretical considerations of processes that take place relative to a uniformly accelerated reference system, we obtain conclusions about the course of processes in a homogeneous gravitational field" (quoted in Stachel, 2007, p. 85). 6. For a more detailed discussion of the role played by the rotating disc in the genesis of general relativity, see7. Einstein had to labour long and hard to transform the initial insight of 1911 or 1912, that gravitation is due to the curvature of space-time, into the field equations of general relativity, first formulated in their final form in 1915. For a magnificent detailed account by a number of authors of Einstein's creation of general relativity, see