

There is a further point. Orthodox quantum theory (OQT) holds that electrons, atoms, even molecules can be in superpositions of statesat different spatial locations at the same time, for example-whereas macroscopic measuring instruments cannot (measuring instruments detecting one outcome and not a superposition of outcomes). This means OQT holds that different laws hold at different levels-different masses, levels of complexity or whatever it may be. This in turn means that OQT is disunified in way n = 2. Physicalism(n=2, N=2) is perhaps compatible with OQT, but any more unified version of physicalism is not. This is a very serious level of disunity. What makes the matter even worse is that OQT does not specify what variables are involved-let alone what value of what variables-in the transition from quantum states and superpositions to classical states without such superpositions.5.7 The hierarchical view

Should physics accept physicalism(8) in line with the argument of section 5.5, and risk committing physics to a highly specific and contentful version of physicalism all too likely to be false, despite its fruitfulness for physics up to the present? Or should physics accept some clumsy version of physicalism indicated in section 5.6, less contentful and thus more likely to be true, but entirely lacking in fruitful guidelines for the development of new physical theories?

No version of presuppositionism which restricts itself to adopting a single (if composite) metaphysical thesis can satisfactorily resolve the conflicting desiderata that are highlighted in these two questions. But this conflict is resolved if we adopt a version of presuppositionism which holds that we need to see physics as adopting a hierarchy of theses, from physicalism(8) near the bottom of the hierarchy to physicalism(1) at the top (see

.1). Physicalism(5-7) are on the same level since they are all but equivalent to one another. As we descend the hierarchy, from level (9) to level (3), theses become increasingly contentful and specific, increasingly potentially fruitful for future progress in theoretical physics but also increasingly likely to be false and in need of revision. As one moves from level (9) to level (3), the corresponding methodological requirements for unity, depicted as sloping dotted lines in

.1, become increasingly demanding, but also increasingly speculative and uncertain. The totality of physical theory, at any given stage in the development of physics (except when a candidate unified theory of everything has been proposed and accepted) will only satisfy these methodological rules partially; a new theory, in order to be an advance from the standpoint of unity, must lead to a new totality of theory satisfying the methodological rules better than the previous totality.

This hierarchical view has the following advantages over any version of presuppositionism that restricts itself to a single (possibly composite) thesis. First, the hierarchical view does justice to both apparently conflicting desiderata, indicated above, which cannot be done if a single metaphysical assumption is made. The hierarchical view includes both the uniquely scientifically fruitful thesis of physicalism

and the much less specific and problematic theses of physicalism

. Second, the hierarchical view, as a result of making explicit metaphysical theses implicitly presupposed in adopting methods associated with levels (4) to (8), facilitates criticism and revision of these methods, which may well need to be done at some stage (if the corresponding metaphysical theses are false). Such criticism and revision is not facilitated if a single thesis is presupposed. Third, the hierarchical view assists revision of the more contentful and specific versions of physicalism low down in the hierarchy by providing a framework of relatively unproblematic assumptions and methods, at levels (9) to (6), which place restrictions on the way the more specific, problematic versions of physicalism may be revised, should the need to do so arise. If a succession of increasingly empirically successful theories are developed, T 1 , T 2 , …, all of which clash with physicalism(8), but which accord increasingly well with physicalism(7), this might be taken as grounds for rejecting or modifying physicalism(8).

The reasons given above for including the relatively specific, scientifically fruitful metaphysical thesis of physicalism(8) in the hierarchy of accepted theses are reasons also for accepting an even more specific, scientifically fruitful metaphysical thesis, should one be available. A glance at the history of physics reveals that a succession of much more specific metaphysical theses have been accepted, or taken very seriously, for a time, each thesis being an attempt to capture aspects of physicalism. Ideas at this level include the following: the universe is made up of rigid corpuscles that interact by contact; it is made up of point atoms that interact at a distance by means of rigid, spherically symmetrical forces; it is made up of a unified field; it is made up of a unified quantum field; it is made up of quantum strings. These ideas tend to reflect the character of either the current best accepted physical theory, or assumptions made by current efforts to develop a new theory. This is not sufficient to be scientifically fruitful in the way that physicalism(8) is. For this, we require that the thesis in question is such that all accepted fundamental physical theories since Newton can be regarded as moving steadily towards capturing the thesis as a testable physical theory, in the manner indicated in section 5.3. One candidate for such a thesis is Lagrangianism. Lagrangianism asserts that the universe is such that all phenomena evolve in accordance with Hamilton's principle of least action, formulated in terms of some unified Lagrangian (or Lagrangian density), L. We require, here, that L is not the sum of two or more distinct Lagrangians, with distinct physical interpretations and symmetries, for example, one for the electroweak force, one for the strong force and one for gravitation, as at present; L must have a single physical interpretation, and its symmetries must have an appropriate group structure (the group not being a product of subgroups). We require, in addition, that current quantum field theories and general relativity emerge when appropriate limits are taken.