According to specialism, on the other hand, intellectual progress is to be conceived in terms of the success that intellectual inquiry meets with in solving specialized, technical, scientific/ academic problems. Progress-or the lack of it-is thus something definite, uncontroversial, something about which there can be general agreement. This is especially true for science. According to specialism, all scientific problems are essentially problems we encounter in seeking to predict more and more phenomena more and more accurately. Thus scientific progress is to be assessed simply in terms of the success we meet with in developing laws and theories which predict more and more phenomena more and more accurately.9.5 Specialism: its dominance and untenability

Actual scientific, academic inquiry, as it exists at present, and has existed during the last hundred years or so, amounts to an uneasy admixture of universalism and specialism. In many ways, however, specialism predominates.

It must of course be acknowledged that some aspects of scientific, academic inquiry do exemplify critical fundamentalist standards. For example, there can be no doubt that science, technology and scholarship have made great progress when viewed from a universalist (or critical fundamentalist) perspective. The special and general theories of relativity and quantum theory have changed profoundly our conception of the physical universe. The theory of evolution, and subsequent developments since Darwin's day, have done much to improve our understanding of how we fit into the world and have come to be. Our whole conception of the cosmos has been utterly transformed during this period. Technological research has done much, potentially and actually, to provide us with the means to create a better human world. Research in history, archaeology, anthropology-and more questionably, research in other social sciences and humanities-has deepened our understanding of ourselves, our past, our potentialities.

In addition to this there have been many noteworthy "universalist" or "critical fundamentalist" thinkers who have consciously sought to help solve one or other of the four fundamental problems. Almost at random, one might mention Albert Einstein, Sigmund Freud, Erwin Schrödinger, Arthur Eddington, Bertrand Russell, Alfred North Whitehead, Henri Poincaré, Carl Gustav Jung, Erich Fromm, Margaret Mead, Karl Popper, Carl Sagan, Ernst Friedrich Schumacher, Ivan Illich, Thomas Szasz, Friedrich Hayek, Arthur Koestler, George Orwell, Theodore Roszak, Jane Goodall, Thomas Nagel, Lynn Margulis, Roger Penrose, Mark Lynas, Ronald Higgins, and of course many others also of varying repute.In many ways, however, the influence of universalism on actual scientific, academic practice is submerged beneath the massive influence of specialism on all but a minute proportion of scientific, academic work. Most scientists and scholars are specialists, concerned only to solve specialist problems not consciously conceived of as sub-problems of the four fundamental problems. Almost all scientific, academic publications are concerned with the resolution of specialist problems. Education is shaped primarily by specialist assumptions and standards, especially towards the upper end of the educational ladder, culminating as it does in the extreme specialism of the PhD thesis. Academic appointments, academic honours, academic success, are all judged in terms of specialist standards-apart from quite exceptional cases.

Perhaps most crucially of all, the overall organization, the institutional structure, of scientific, academic inquiry exemplifies specialism rather than universalism. Universities are split up into relatively autonomous faculties: for example, faculties of physical sciences, biological sciences, technology, medicine, humanities or arts. Each faculty is subdivided into a number of relatively autonomous departments corresponding roughly to distinct academic disciplines. On the intellectual level, however, the subdivisions proceed further: each discipline is subdivided into a number of sub-disciplines; a specialist whose field of expertise lies within such a sub-discipline may not even be able to communicate properly-let alone share problems-with colleagues working within the same discipline. Such an expert will communicate almost exclusively with his fellow specialists scattered throughout the world-thus participating in what has been called an "invisible college"The striking point to note about all this is that nowhere is any provision made whatsoever for sustained, explicit, influential discussion of fundamental problems. This does not exist at the level of individual universities; nor does it exist at the level of published intellectual discussion, at the level of "invisible colleges".Scientific, academic inquiry is, in other words, organized overwhelmingly in accordance with the intellectual standards of specialism. And recently, this drive towards more and more specialized research has become much, much worse as a result of the pressures academics are under to publish, or perish.

All this has dire intellectual consequences-especially, of course, if viewed from the perspective of universalism. The remorseless concern to solve exclusively specialist problems for their own sake; the proliferation of specialized disciplines (disciplines within disciplines, the autonomy of each jealously guarded); the accumulation of specialized results and vocabulary; increasingly specialized education (specialist indoctrination); the absence of informed, critical, non-technical discussion of fundamental issues-all these factors combine to make it overwhelmingly difficult for anyone to discover, understand and use the fundamentalist implications of specialized results. Intellectual inquiry becomes increasingly fragmented and incoherent, increasingly unusable from the standpoint of helping us to improve our answers to the four fundamental questions.