. But the new theory had achieved such striking successes, it was rational to conjecture that progress lay in developing the new theory, applying it to new phenomena, reconciling it with special relativity-in doing something like Kuhnian normal science, in other words-rather than in trying to develop a rival theory, a rival research programme. (To say this is not to say that serious attention should not have been given to the theoretical defects of orthodox quantum theory.) Not only does the history of science fail to reveal that there are always competing research programmes, whenever a new theory arrives on the scene that meets with extraordinary empirical success and no refutation, no good rationale may exist for inventing a rival research programme. (As we have seen, unlike Popper's falsificationism and Lakatos's research programme view, AOE holds that something like Kuhn's normal science may well be rational, as long as it is accompanied by some sustained tackling of problems associated with the currently accepted blueprint. This may, eventually, but not immediately, lead to the development of a new fundamental theory, a new research programme.)

There are other, much more decisive ways in which AOE is an improvement over Lakatos's view. Lakatos's methodology of research programmes inherits a number of unsolved problems from its two sources, Popper and Kuhn. Like Popper and Kuhn, Lakatos has no solution to the problem of what the simplicity, unity or explanatory character of a theory, or hard core, is; AOE, as I have indicated briefly above, solves the problem without difficulty. In failing to say what simplicity is, Lakatos also fails to articulate with any precision that part of scientific method concerned with simplicity; AOE faces no difficulty here either. Like Popper and Kuhn, Lakatos can say nothing useful about how new theories, new hard cores, are created or discovered; AOE, as a result of including levels 3 and 4 within the domain of scientific knowledge, is able to specify a rational, if fallible and non-mechanical, method for the creation of new theories, even new fundamental theories of physics. Finally, Lakatos's view fails to solve the problem of verisimilitude, a problem which can be readily solved granted AOE.

Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos, despite their differences, have one big failure in common (the source of almost all the others). All three take for granted that:

(A) In science no untestable but nevertheless substantial thesis about the world can be accepted as a part of scientific knowledge in such a firm way that theories which clash with it, even if highly successful empirically, are nevertheless rejected.

Popper accepts (A) in that, for him, untestable theses are metaphysical, and therefore not a part of scientific knowledge. Kuhn holds it, because, for Kuhn, nothing theoretical survives a revolution. Kuhn's acceptance of (A) is also apparent in his whole treatment of revolutions: precisely because Kuhn accepts (A), Kuhn cannot invoke anything like the level 4 thesis of physicalism to assess rival paradigms during a revolution, when empirical considerations are inconclusive. The Kuhnian irrationality of revolutions is a consequence of scientists accepting (A); and in so far as Kuhn thinks this irrationality is inevitable, Kuhn accepts (A) as well.

A case could be made out for saying that Lakatos came near to rejecting (A) in arguing for the need for science to adopt a conjectural metaphysical inductive principle which, if true, would more or less guarantee that Popperian, or rather Lakatosian, methods deliver authentic theoretical knowledge.

But Lakatos here missed the fundamental point, central to AOE, and highly Popperian in spirit, that our current methods are all too likely to be more or less the wrong methods to adopt, the metaphysics implicit in these methods being false. There is thus a vital need, for the sake of scientific progress, to make this false metaphysics explicit so that it can be criticized, so that alternatives can be developed and considered, leading to improved metaphysics and methods. In order to do this in the best possible way, we need to develop a hierarchy of metaphysical theses to form a framework of relatively unproblematic theses, at the top of the hierarchy, below which more specific and problematic theses may be developed and assessed, especially in the light of their potential and actual empirically progressive character.

Interestingly enough, Lakatos himself was aware of this deficiency in his "plea to Popper for a whiff of

Discussing his proposal that one should appeal to a metaphysical inductive principle as a conjecture as a part of the solution to the problem of induction, Lakatos says:

Alas, a solution is interesting only if it is embedded in, or leads to, a major research programme; if it creates new problems-and solutions-in turn. But this would be the case only if such an inductive principle could be sufficiently richly formulated so that one may, say criticize our scientific game from its point of view. My inductive principle tries to explain why we "play" the game of science. But it does so in an ad hoc, not in a "fact-correcting" (or, if you wish, "basic value judgment correcting") way.