

Much of the rest of the book is devoted to developing and defending Popper's three-world view. There are, according to this view, three worlds: the physical world (world 1), the psychological or mental world (world 2), and the world of objective theories, propositions, arguments and problems (world 3). World 3 interacts with world 1 via world 2.

Popper argues that this interaction is demonstrated by the fact that scientific theories lead to new technology, world 1 phenomena, which would not exist were it not for the prior development of world 3 theories. Popper puts world 3 into a biological and evolutionary context: like the webs, nests and dams created by spiders, birds and beavers, so too world 3 is our creation but, once created, it acquires an objective existence independent of us.

This theme is continued in Popper's contribution to The Self and Its Brain (S.B.)a book written with the neurologist John Eccles. In this work, Popper develops a sustained argument in support of interactionism and his three-world view, and criticizes materialism, physicalism and the thesis that the physical world is (causally) closed. There is also an interesting chapter on the history of the mind-body problem, in which Popper argues for the questionable thesis that the problem was recognized independently of, and before the arrival of, anything like the modern scientific view of the world.

What is one to make of this three-world view? Popper is surely right to hold that the contents of theories need to be distinguished from their linguistic forms (and from the causal effects these linguistic forms can have on appropriately educated brains). Popper is also right, surely, to stress that in order to make human sense of human action, we need to attend to the contents of theories. But it is quite another matter to argue, as Popper does, that world 3 entities, such as contents of theories, exist as full-blooded, almost Platonic entities, poltergeistic intellectual objects capable of influencing material phenomena via their influence on conscious minds. Popper overlooks or ignores the possibility that the material world may be causally closed but not explanatorily closed. He overlooks, that is, the possibility that physical phenomena, such as those associated with human actions and human technology, can be explained and understood in two distinct (but perhaps interdependent) ways: (1) physically and causally, in terms of physical theory, and (2) "personalistically", in terms of the intentions, plans and ideas of people. Such a view would hold that personalistic explanation is compatible with, but not reducible to, physical explanation. This view would give to the contents of theories a vital role in the (personalistic) explanation of human actions and the development of technology, without in any way undermining the existence, in principle, of a purely physical, causal explanation of physical phenomena associated with human action and technology (see

Popper insists that his world 3 entities differ from Plato's Forms in that they are man-made, they consist of theories, including false theories, and problems, rather than reified concepts or essences, and there is no suggestion that world 3 objects can be known with certainty. But even if Popper's world 3 entities do not have implausible epistemological Platonic features, they most certainly have highly implausible ontological and causal Platonic features, in that they have causal effects on the material world (via their influence on conscious minds). That the elderly Popper should espouse such an implausible Platonic doctrine almost seems like Plato's revenge for the youthful Popper's onslaught against him.

Chapter three of Objective Knowledge is called "Epistemology Without a Knowing Subject". Despite the title, Popper does not altogether neglect the personal dimension of the search for knowledge. What he does argue is that subjective knowledge is irrelevant to the study of scientific knowledge, only knowledge construed in objective, impersonal, world 3 terms being important. But this downplays the point that all of objective knowledge, stored in books and libraries, is of value only in so far as it is understood and used by people. Albert Einstein once remarked: "Knowledge exists in two forms-lifeless, stored in books, and alive in the consciousness of men. The second form of existence is after all the essential one; the first, indispensable as it may be, occupies only an inferior position"). Einstein's priorities seem saner than later Popper's. And altogether saner, more humane and downto-earth than elderly Popper's spooky world 3 objects, is the viewpoint of the more youthful Popper of O.S.E., which sees science and reason in personal, social and institutional terms, without any appeal being made to ghostly, quasi-Platonic Forms.

In 1974 Popper became the fourteenth subject of The Library of Living Philosophers, edited by P. A. Schilpp. This two-volume work opens with Popper's "Intellectual Autobiography"-subsequently published independently as Unended Quest (1976a)-continues with descriptive and critical papers on diverse aspects of Popper's work, by Quine, Putnam, Lakatos, Medawar, Watkins, Ayer, Margenau, Grünbaum, Kuhn and others, and concludes with Popper's replies. Unended Quest is a fascinating book, and gives a gripping account of Popper's lifelong, passionate engagement with his fundamental problems and concerns. It includes a marvellous discussion of the development of polyphonic music, and provides an account of Popper's battles with subjectivism in physics in connection with quantum theory, and with thermodynamics and the arrow of time. Popper also declares that it was he who killed logical positivism. This book, together with C.R., provides the best introduction to Popper's philosophy.