

15. See Maxwell (2014c, ch. 1) for a suggestion as to how critical fundamentalist education might be conducted for five-to ninety-five-year-olds. 16. Kuhn, for example, argues that the instigation of the specialized, autonomous puzzle solving of the specialist is essential for scientific progress (see). 17. As we shall see below, there is a further vital point of difference. Universalism asserts that inquiry can only be really intellectually rigorous if it is recognized that inquiry (thought, problem solving), at the most fundamental level, goes on in life as an integral part of our personal and social lives, actively helping us to discover and achieve what is of most value in life, potentially and actually, as we live. 18. A further clarification, to be elaborated below. Universalism conceives of intellectual progress, fundamentally, in personal and social terms, in terms of progress in our achievement of what is of value in life, in terms of the progress in our personal and social thinking actively associated with and guiding our endeavours to achieve what is of value, on a personal and worldwide basis. 19. A remark about the first and last of these "fundamentalists". Einstein once said: "I want to know how God created this world. I'm not interested in this-or-that phenomenon, the spectrum of this-or-that element. I want to know His thoughts, the rest are details" (see. In The Seventh Enemy: The Human Factor in the Global Crisis, R.outlines with devastating clarity and force six basic threats to the future of civilization-six fundamental worldwide problems which we must somehow resolve on a worldwide basis if mankind is to survive. His "seventh enemy" is our human incapacity to acknowledge and respond to these fundamental problems, on both individual and social, political or institutional, levels. Thus, on a worldwide basis, life on earth is at present almost lunatically irrational in the most elementary fashion (since it fails to put into practice the two most elementary rules of rational problem solving). 20. It must be emphasized that this modern meaning of the phrase, introduced by Price, is a typical specialist perversion of the original fundamentalist meaning intended, for example, by Robert Boyle in the seventeenth century when he writes:

The "Invisible College" consists of persons that endeavour to put narrow-mindedness out of countenance by the practice of so extensive a charity that it reaches unto every thing called man, and nothing less than an universal good-will can content it. And indeed they are so apprehensive of the want of good employment that they take the whole body of mankind for their care. But … there is not enough of them.21. It is noteworthy, for example, thatis obliged to break all conventional academic boundaries in order to articulate our basic global problems. It is also noteworthy that these problems discussed by Higgins and others do not receive sustained, influential discussion as an integral part of the orthodox scientific, academic enterprise. In recent years this may, however, have changed a bit; the growing menace of climate change has led some experts to speak out about the problem in non-specialist terms. There is, in recent times, more discussion of global problems in universities-as I shall indicate below. Some determined academics do manage to struggle against the stifling constraints of specialism.have all produced work that can be regarded as making valuable contributions to the fundamental problem "How do we fit into the world and how have we come to be?" In contrast to this tradition, there is so-called Continental philosophy: idealism, phenomenology, existentialism, Marxism, the Frankfurt School, structuralism, post-structuralism, postmodernism, and the work of G.W.F. Hegel, Arthur Schopenhauer, Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Edmund Husserl, Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, and many others. Some of this work can be held to put problems of living at the heart of thought, but as a body of work it is deeply flawed by anti-scientific and anti-rationalist attitudes, an allegiance to idealism, and a readiness to aspire to profundity by means of bombastic obscurity. These prevalent flaws disqualify this body of work from constituting serious discussion of fundamental problems within the context of universalism. See, however, Bakewell (2016) for a delightful account of the lives and work of the existentialists. Karl Popper, as I have already indicated, has been highly critical of both philosophical traditions. He has argued that real philosophical problems have their roots outside philosophy, in science, politics, art, social life, and in his work he tackles fundamental problems with exemplary clarity and intellectual integrity (especially in