If we grant the truth of the theses of AOE, from level 4 to 7, a straightforward answer can be given. Physicalism tells us that a unified pattern of physical law governs all phenomena. By far our best efforts at discovering invariant (or unified) laws governing such things as bodies in free fall near the earth's surface are Newton's theory of gravitation and, better still, Einstein's theory. No rival theory is even remotely as good at complying with the two requirements of (1) empirical success and (2) compatibility with physicalism. Theories that are empirically more successful and predict a gentle landing can be concocted, but these clash horribly with physicalism, and deserve to be rejected for that reason. But Newton's or Einstein's theory (plus additional information about such things as the mass of the earth) predict with stark clarity: jumping leads to rapid acceleration at roughly 32 feet per second squared. Above all, a theory which accords with physicalism as well as Newton's or Einstein's theory, but predicts that jumping will lead to a gentle floating to the ground, is nowhere on the horizon. Thus, given the truth of physicalism, there is absolutely no question, no grounds for serious doubt, whatsoever: jumping is for suicides only.

But we are not given the truth of physicalism. At most, arguments deployed above give grounds for accepting physicalism granted our aim is to improve our conjectural knowledge of truth. There are arguments justifying acceptance of theses at levels 3 to 7, but no arguments justifying the truth of these theses. And it is the latter we require, it seems, to solve Worrall's problem, and the practical problem of induction more generally.

I have two replies to this objection. First, even in the absence of any kind of justification of the truth of physicalism AOE succeeds, nevertheless, in distinguishing decisively between conjectures we are confident are true, to the extent even of entrusting our lives to their truth, and conjectures (even empirically more successful conjectures) about whose truth we have no such confidence.

Second, the demand that the truth of physicalism must receive some kind of justification before it becomes rationally acceptable for practical purposes is not just impossible to fulfil; it deserves to be rejected in that it stems from an unrigorous, untenable conception of science, and human knowledge more generally. If, and only if, some version of SE is correct, and science is based on evidence, and on metaphysical theses whose truth has been justified (if there are any), is the demand to justify the truth of physicalism itself justifiable. But all versions of SE are unrigorous and untenable. Hence, the SE demand to justify physicalism is itself unjustifiable, and must be rejected. What has been demonstrated above is that all significant factual knowledge, common sense and scientific, implies (and thus presupposes) cosmological theses: rigour requires that these unjustifiable cosmological theses are made explicit, so that they can be critically assessed and, we may hope, improved. To demand that such cosmological theses cannot be accepted unless their truth is justified condemns science to lack of rigour, because it ensures that unjustifiable cosmological theses will not be, and cannot be, accepted as a part of scientific knowledge. The demand deserves to be rejected.

Human knowledge has always had this inescapable cosmological dimension built into it. The illusion that science could dispense with such unjustifiable cosmological conjectures only crept in with the general acceptance of SE, some time after Newton and before the end of the nineteenth century. What needs to be done is not to justify the truth of physicalism, but rather to justify the claim that this cosmological conjecture has played a more fruitful role in the advance of science than any rival at that level. Just this was done above. Science does not prove its cosmological conjectures; it sets out to improve those it has inherited from the past. Physicalism is the best available, at that level of generality, and that suffices to solve the Worrall problem, and the justificational problem of induction. We are justified in entrusting our lives to the standard empirical predictions of those theories (a) which have met with sufficient empirical success, and (b) which, together with other such empirically successful theories, are more nearly compatible with our best metaphysical theses concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe. Our best metaphysical theses, in turn, are those which have generated the most empirically progressive scientific research programmes. The circularity that seems to be involved here is legitimized by acceptance of meta-knowability.

7.5 Cosmological conjectures need acknowledgement and improvement

I now spell out in a little more detail the point just made, which is central to the solution to the practical problem of induction.

When viewed from the perspective of SE, it looks as if, in order to solve the practical problem, sufficiently good grounds must be given for the truth of physicalism, from scratch as it were. Acknowledging, initially, only knowledge of particular empirical facts, we must somehow provide an argument for the truth of physicalism which is so good that it justifies us in being entirely confident of the truth of physicalism even when our lives are at stake. Let us call this the "SE requirement" for solving the practical problem of induction. Given this requirement, the prospects for solving the practical problem of induction seem hopeless. But this requirement itself deserves to be rejected. It is only acceptable if what I shall call "the SE prescription" is acceptable. But this latter is an intellectual disaster and deserves to be rejected. Hence the SE requirement must be rejected as well.