5.8 Alternative versions of aim-oriented empiricism

The hierarchical view depicted in1 may need to be rejected in its entirety as physics advances. If we exclude from consideration physicalism(n = 1, N = ), which permits anything, the hierarchical view assumes that the universe is at least partially physically comprehensible in the sense that phenomena occur in accordance with physical laws which are more or less disunified, the traditional distinction between laws and initial conditions being presupposed. But even though the universe is physically comprehensible, the traditional distinction between laws and initial conditions might not be observed. The true theory of everything might be cosmological in character, and might specify unique initial conditions for the universe.This possibility, and other possibilities of this kind, could no doubt be accommodated within a modified version of the above hierarchical view. But there are other possibilities, of philosophical interest even if of no interest to physics as at present constituted, which cannot be so accommodated. Perhaps God is ultimately responsible for all natural phenomena, or some kind of cosmic purpose or cosmic programme analogous to a computer program (as has been suggested). In these cases the universe would be comprehensible but not physically comprehensible-even though it might mimic a physically comprehensible universe, to some extent.

In order to accommodate these, and other such, possibilities we need to embed the above hierarchical view in the broader view I have called "aim-oriented empiricism" (AOE), depicted in1. However, in order to do this, AOE, as depicted in1, needs to be modified. In this modified figure, we would have in succession, as we go up the hierarchy, empirical phenomena (level 1); accepted fundamental physical theory (level 2); best blueprint (level 3); then, at level 4, the thesis that the universe is perfectly comprehensible physically-physicalism(n=8); at level 5 the thesis that the universe is all but perfectly comprehensible physically-physicalism(n>4, N=1); at level 6, the thesis that the universe is partially comprehensible physically-physicalism(n>4, N<10); at level 7, the thesis that the universe is partially comprehensible, either physically or in some other way; at level 8, the thesis of meta-knowability: the universe is such that we can discover how to improve our methods of learning; and finally, at level 9, the thesis of partial knowability: the universe is such that we can acquire some knowledge of our local circumstances.

The level 8 thesis, here, asserts that the universe is such that there is some rationally discoverable proposition about its nature (relative to existing knowledge) which, if accepted, makes it possible progressively to improve methods for the improvement of knowledge. "Rationally discoverable" means at least that the thesis is not an arbitrary choice from infinitely many analogous theses. This thesis is to be interpreted as asserting that the universe is not epistemologically malicious, in the sense that apparently improved methods lead to apparent new knowledge which turns out, subsequently, to be illusory, there being no possibility of discovering this before it is revealed. (This is clarified in the next section.) Level 9 asserts that the universe is such that we can continue to acquire knowledge of our local circumstances, sufficient to make life possible.

Such an amalgam of Figures 5.1 and 9.1 (see Chapter 9) is not altogether satisfactory. It is somewhat arbitrary to declare that physicalism(n>4, N=9) represents a partially physically comprehensible universe, but physicalism(n>4, N=10) does not. Some may question that the alternative thesis at level 7-the thesis that the universe is comprehensible non-physically-has anything to do with physics, or science. One can imagine circumstances, however, in which this thesis might well be preferred to any thesis of partial physical comprehensibility. Suppose God manifests Himself in the sky, and responds to our requests to perform specific miracles by doing just that-converting the orbit of Mercury into a square orbit, for example, or lifting everyone on earth one foot into the air, except where this is impossible or dangerous. How could we not accept, in such circumstances, that God is ultimately in charge of Nature?

Reasons for accepting these theses are similar to those given for accepting the hierarchy of theses of the view depicted inand 5.1. As a result of accepting this hierarchy of theses, physics provides itself with a framework of assumptions, and associated methods, high up in the hierarchy, which it will never benefit the pursuit of knowledge to reject; in this way, a framework is created within which very much more substantial and dubious theses, low down in the hierarchy, can be critically scrutinized and, we may hope, improved. The thesis at the top of the hierarchy, at level 9, asserts that the universe is such that we can acquire some knowledge of our local circumstances. If this assumption is false, we will not be able to acquire knowledge whatever we assume. We are justified in accepting this assumption permanently as a part of our knowledge, even if we have no grounds for holding it to be true, since accepting it can only help, and cannot hinder, the acquisition of knowledge whatever the universe is like. The thesis at level 4, physicalism(8), deserves to be accepted because of its extraordinary scientific fruitfulness. All major theoretical developments in physics point towards, and draw closer to, physicalism(8), in that they are invariably major steps in unification, as we saw in section 5.5 above. From the standpoint of scientific fruitfulness, at this level, physicalism(8) has no rival, unless it is the even more substantial thesis of Lagrangianism. Nevertheless, physicalism(8) may be false, and physics may, at some stage, need to adopt a different thesis. Accepting physicalism(8) within the framework of theses just indicated facilitates the development of alternatives, should this be necessary.