So vehement was Popper's condemnation of specialization that he failed to see its value, indeed its necessity-and failed to see how the damaging irrationality of specialism can be overcome by implementing rule (d) of the four rules of rational problem solving I formulated in section 9.2. For a more detailed criticism of academic philosophy, on the grounds that it fails to keep alive rational tackling of fundamental problems-and fails to solve two key philosophical problems as a result-see Maxwell (2017b, chs. 3 and 4). 23. Something like this account is presupposed, or propounded, by G.ch. 1, pp. 1-18) and Whiteley (1955, pp. 5-6). 24. An amusing indication of this is the way in which philosophers tend to acknowledge, apologetically or critically, that philosophy still concerns itself with the problems discussed by, for example, Plato, whereas other disciplines successfully solve initial problems and move on to new problems, thus making progress. The failure of philosophy to progress in this way is only problematic if philosophy is conceived in specialist terms. From the standpoint of the fundamentalist or Enlightenment conception of philosophy, it is of course precisely the basic task of philosophy to keep alive, throughout the whole of intellectual inquiry, and throughout our culture and social life, a sustained concern with our four fundamental problems. 25. Since the first version of this chapter was published, in 1980, some academics have become concerned that members of the public should contribute to discussion concerning science policy options. Thus, in the UK, the Royal Society produced a report on the future of nanotechnology, the result of a collaboration of scientists and non-scientists. The Economic and Social Research Council has funded a research programme, Science in Society, which has explored issues having to do with public engagement with science. There is a rather general recognition that communication between science and the public should go in both directions. It is not good enough for scientists merely to inform the public about science. These developments do not, however, amount to academia as a whole engaging with the social world in a two-way discussion about how our problems of living are to be tackled in increasingly cooperatively rational ways. 26. It is this feature of universalism which led me to suggest the view should really be called "specio-universalism" (see note 1). 27. Failure to put universalism into practice has, as a consequence, that sustained discussion of our fundamental global problems does not take place in a way that can influence the priorities of scientific research. As a result, research devoted to such matters as halting global warming, or alleviating global poverty, and the diseases of the global poor, is neglected, in favour of research funded by, and devoted to the interests of, the military, government, industry and commerce. 28. For a more detailed and sophisticated advocacy of this critical fundamentalist conception of science, see Chapters 2 and 5, andFor a critical assessment, seeand my replyand my replyFor more recent expositions see Maxwell). 29. Contrast Russell's uncritical or inflexible "postulational" approach with the critical, flexible postulationism of aim-oriented empiricism, which stresses that science, in order to be rational, must continuously articulate, develop and criticize metaphysical blueprints for science as an integral part of scientific inquiry, and in the light of ostensible scientific progress, thus enabling us to improve our aims and methods as our scientific knowledge and understanding of the world improves. 30.31. See note 28. 32. This important point can be established quite simply as follows. Science is centrally concerned to solve the problem "What kind of world is this?" If science is to tackle this problem rationally, priority needs to be given to proposing and critically assessing possible solutions-thus developing a tradition of rational cosmology like that represented, for example, by Popper in his "Back to the Presocratics"This leads, however, to the development of a number of rival imprecise possible solutions-rival cosmologies-with no indication as to how we are to make these vague ideas precise and choose between them. In order to proceed, we need to put into practice the third and fourth rules of rational problem solving: each vague solution needs to generate preliminary, subordinate, specialized problem solving. If one such approach begins to achieve apparent spectacular specialized success, then this entitles us to take this general approach especially seriously. Thus the spectacular specialized successes of Kepler and Galileo entitle us to take especially seriously their common vague cosmological presupposition: "the book of Nature is written in the language ofmathematics." If science is to proceed rationally, however, it is essential that there continues to be an interplay between our best ideas as to how the overall problem is to be solved, and our best solutions to subordinate problems. In particular, our assessment of possible solutions to subordinate problems-testable scientific laws and theories-must not be dissociated from our assessment of untestable, metaphysical ideas as to how the overall problem is to be solved. Popper, however, violates this elementary, general requirement for rationality, in insisting that assessment of scientific laws and theories is dissociated from assessment of metaphysical ideas. Furthermore, it is precisely this irrational insistence which creates, for Popper, the insoluble problem of induction. The impossibility of assessing scientific laws and theories solely with respect to empirical success is a special case of the general irrationality of attempting to assess possible solutions to subordinate problems independently of vague ideas about how to solve the overall problem. The problem of induction, in short, is a product of specialism, the insolubility of the problem, as traditionally conceived, an indication of the irrationality of specialism as far as science is concerned. 33. Ironically enough, Popper does come close to acknowledging the Russellian point that the methods of science make implicit metaphysical presuppositions about the nature of the world (see