The field equations of general relativity are the simplest possible solution to this problem. Indeed, granted that the equations involve derivatives no higher than the second, the field equations are determined uniquelytobe:

Here R ab is the Ricci tensor of the metric g ab (the Ricci tensor being derivable from the Riemannian curvature tensor by contraction), R is the Ricci scalar (formed from R ab by contraction), T ab is the energy-momentum tensor, and G is Newton's constant of gravitation.We have arrived at T 3 , which reduces to special relativity (T 2 ) in the absence of gravitation, and which approaches Newtonian theory (T 1 ) in the limit as gravitational fields become weak and velocities become low in comparison with the velocity offlight.

3.4 Did Einstein really employ aim-oriented empiricism?

Does Einstein really put aim-oriented empiricism into practice in developing the special and general theories of relativity, in the way II have just sketched? Is there, here, a genuine method of discovery, given that Einstein failed for over thirty years to develop a satisfactory unified field theory? AAfew comments are innorder. The full aim-oriented empiricist method of discovery involves the tackling of at least five kinds of problems: (1) conflicts between experimental results and theory, (2) conflicts between two or more wellestablished fundamental theories, (3) conflicts between such theories and the best available blueprint for physics at level 3 in1 (see Chapter 2), 9 (4) conflicts inherent in the best blueprint itself (or between rival blueprints), and (5) conflicts between established physical theory and the level 4 thesis of physicalism. It could be argued that Einstein only exploits a small part of this method of discovery, in that he is primarily concerned with type (2) problems (and type (1) problems where relevant). But this is, I think, wrong for a number of reasons.

First, the metaphysical thesis that the basic laws of nature have a unified structure is an implicit or explicit assumption in all of Einstein's deliberations, which means type (4) problems are, for Einstein, fundamental.

Second, in developing special and general relativity it is precisely the pre-existing metaphysical blueprints of classical physics that Einstein is led to transform: basic assumptions about the nature of space, time, energy, mass, force. In developing new principles-such as the principle of Lorentz invariance or the principle of equivalenceEinstein is, at one and the same time, modifying pre-existing blueprint ideas (Newtonian space-time being transformed into Minkowskian space-time, which is in turn transformed into the Riemannian spacetime of general relativity).

Third, lurking behind the type (2) problems which concern Einstein (involving clashes between theories) there are type (4) blueprint problems. Consider the type (2) problem that led to special relativity-the clash between Newtonian mechanics and Maxwellian electrodynamics or, more specifically, the clash between Galilean invariance and the thesis that the constancy of the velocity of light is a law of nature. Around 1900, as we have seen, there was an obvious solution to this problem: interpret electrodynamics in terms of the aether, regard the constancy of the velocity of light as being relative to the aether, and expect Galilean invariance to break down for high velocities with respect to the aether. This amounts, of course, to adopting a blueprint for physics-the aether blueprint. In formulating the problem in the way in which he did, Einstein is in effect rejecting this aether blueprint; he is adopting Faraday's view that the field is fundamental, and does not require an underlying aether to make it comprehensible. As I have argued elsewhere (see note 4), there are good reasons for preferring what may be termed the Faraday blueprint to the aether blueprint. The important point, however, is that in formulating his type (2) problem in the way in which he did (crucial for the development of special relativity), Einstein is in effect interpreting Newton's and Maxwell's theories to be two equally fundamental, rival theories, each with its rival blueprint, namely, the Newtonian (or Boscovichean) blueprint of point particles surrounded by spherically symmetrical, rigid fields, and the Faraday field blueprint with variations in the field being transmitted at some finite velocity. There is, in short, a type (4) blueprint problem inherent in the type (2) problem that led Einstein to special relativity. This type (4) problem may be formulated, not as a problem about how to reconcile, or choose between, two rival blueprints, but rather as the problem of how to resolve the clash that results from attempting to unify the two blueprints in such a way as to accommodate charged point particles and a field.

Fourth, there are grounds for holding that Einstein's fundamental problem soon after 1900 was the type (4) blueprint problem I have just indicated-the problem of understanding how charged point particles can interact with the field, or the problem of unifying point particle and field. It is a striking fact that Einstein's three great papers of 1905 can all be interpreted as exploring aspects of this fundamental problem. We have just seen that this is true of the paper introducing special relativity. It is also true of the Brownian motion paper, concerned to establish the existence of atoms-the existence of the particle-like aspect of reality. And it is true above all of the paper which put forward the idea that light has a particle-like aspect in accordance with E = nh (where E is the energy and  the frequency of the light, h is Planck's constant and n is some integer, the number of light quanta present), this "heuristic" hypothesis of light quanta then being used to explain the photoelectric effect. Here the classical particle/ field problem is intensified to an extraordinary extent in that the field itself is revealed to have a particle-like aspect.