All this demonstrates just how sound Einstein's instincts were when he judged OQT to be an unacceptable theory. How unerringly correct Einstein was to declare that Bohr and company "do not see what sort of risky game they are playing with reality"; and how sound his comparison is between OQT and "the system of delusions of an exceedingly intelligent paranoiac, concocted of incoherent elements of thoughts", namely QT and CP! It is important to appreciate that the above six defects of OQT, even though consequences of the impossibility of interpreting OQT realistically, are not defects that only realists will recognize. Any physicist, whether realist or instrumentalist, aim-oriented empiricist or standard empiricist ought, in practice, to regard the above defects as sufficient grounds for finding OQT unacceptable.We have here, in effect, an additional general argument against instrumentalism and for realism. Any fundamental physical theory, and not just OQT, which is interpreted instrumentalistically as predicting only the (observable) outcomes of measurements will be, in the same way, unacceptably (i) ad hoc, (ii) imprecise, and (iv) non-explanatory. In other words, theoretical unity implies realism; anti-realism, built into a physical theory (as it is built into OQT) must inevitably, at some point, lead to unacceptable ad hocness or aberrance (see, where this argument is spelled out in more detail).

Even though it is not essential to be an aim-oriented empiricist in order to find OQT unacceptable, it helps. For aim-oriented empiricism provides a clear and cogent raison d'être for finding OQT unacceptable even though the theory has met with such outstanding empirical success. Standard empiricism, on the other hand, can provide no such raison d'être. If scientific theories ought in the end to be judged solely on the basis of empirical success and failure, then there can be no rational grounds for rejecting OQT, given its immense, its unprecedented, empirical success.

It is in just this way that most of Einstein's contemporaries tended to view his rejection of OQT: as the outcome of unscientific, metaphysical prejudice, or even as an indication of "senility" (as Einstein himself put it). Even Abraham Pais, so knowledgeable about, and so sympathetic towards Einstein, nevertheless regards Einstein's objections to OQT as "unfounded"

Einstein's attitude towards OQT, so strikingly at odds with most of his contemporaries, provides further evidence in support of my contention that aim-oriented empiricism is implicit in Einstein's scientific work. If Einstein had assessed OQT in purely standard empiricist terms, he could have had no rational grounds for rejecting OQT-no grounds even for rejecting OQT as a "point of departure" (since this is an epistemological judgement, to the effect that OQT is fundamentally false).

From the standpoint of standard empiricism, Einstein's implacable opposition to OQT is just plain irrational prejudice. From the standpoint of aim-oriented empiricism, however, Einstein's rejection of OQT emerges as entirely well founded, scientific, rational and objective. OQT is entirely acceptable from the standpoint of empirical considerations, but unacceptable from the equally important standpoint of theoretical unity, comprehensibility. The scandal is that the majority of contemporary physicists do not see this obvious point-or did not, until quite recently.

What is irrational, in other words, is not Einstein's rejection of OQT, but the majority acceptance of OQT, the general blindness to its gross defects. Einstein, I believe, held this to be the result of the fact that too many physicists put fame before understanding the universe. Einstein felt that, given a choice between winning a Nobel Prize and improving our understanding of the universe, too many physicists would choose the former over the latter. This, for Einstein, amounted to a betrayal of the soul of theoretical physics, the pursuit of a corrupt goal, fame (not for Einstein so very different from the pursuit of power), in preference to the pursuit of the noble goal of improving understanding. And this in turn was, for Einstein, I believe, characteristic of a general sickness of our age: the pursuit of shallow or corrupt goals in life in preference to goals of genuine value.Here is the source of Einstein's inability to contribute to OQT after 1926. It is in this sense that Einstein's pursuit of his unified field theory is a kind of moral protest; this was the clearest way in which he could express his conviction as to what physics ought to be, at its best.

Einstein did not get everything right about OQT. He assumed that the ostensibly highly non-local features of OQT, which seem to contradict special relativity, do not correspond to reality. Here he was wrong.

If two particles, 1 and 2, interact at time t 1 and then separate widely then, in certain circumstances, a measurement performed on 1 at time t 2 enables one to predict with certainty what the result would be of measuring 2. A measurement of the momentum of 1 enables one to predict the precise momentum of 2; or, alternatively, a measurement of the position of 1 enables one to predict the position of 2. It is possible that 2 only acquires a precise momentum or position at time t 2 , when one or other kind of measurement is performed on 1. This possibility requires that an influence of some kind travels instantaneously from 1 to 2 to inform 2 as to whether it should acquire a precise momentum or position. If we reject the existence of such instantaneous influences, then in order to explain the correlations between measurements on 1 and 2 we are obliged to hold, it seems, that these correlations are the outcome of correlations established at time t 1 , when 1 and 2 interact. But this has the consequence that at time t 2 particle 2 must simultaneously have a precise position and momentum (since 2, by hypothesis, cannot "know" instantaneously, at time t 2 , whether particle 1, far away, is subjected to a position or momentum measurement). But, according to OQT, no system can be in a state which corresponds to having simultaneously a precise position and momentum. Thus OQT implies that correlations cannot be established at t 1 when 1 and 2 interact; they must be established instantaneously, at t 2 , when one or other measurement is performed on 1.