I conclude that Einstein came close to articulating aim-oriented empiricism towards the end of his life, even if he did not recognize that this position is required to solve the problem of induction, and did not appreciate that it provides a more rational conception of science than does standard empiricism-and not a less rational conception, as Einstein's references to "faith" and "miracle-creed" tend to suggest.

In the end, however, what really matters is the philosophy of science implicit in Einstein's scientific deeds. Einstein himself held this view. As he put it: "If you want to find out anything from the theoretical physicists about the methods they use, I advise you to stick closely to one principle: don't listen to their words, fix your attention on their deeds"). As we have seen above, in order to make rational sense of Einstein's scientific judgements and deeds it is essential to see them from the standpoint of aim-oriented empiricism. More important, Einstein can be said to have invented aim-oriented empiricism in scientific practice during the course of discovering the special and general theories of relativity. His success in discovering these theories owes much to the invention and exploitation of the rational method of discovery of aim-oriented empiricism. This aspect of Einstein's work transformed the whole character of subsequent theoretical physics. Einstein's contributions to theoretical physics are intimately interrelated with his contribution to the philosophy of physics: after Einstein, indeed, physics and philosophy of physics ought to form one integrated discipline-aim-oriented empiricist natural philosophy. The various versions of standard empiricism defended by Popper, van Fraassen and Fine (and most contemporary philosophers of science) all fail to do justice to this vital dimension of Einstein's contribution to science. Indeed, advocacy of standard empiricism after Einstein amounts in itself to a failure to understand an important aspect of Einstein's contribution to science.

Non-empirical requirements scientific theories must satisfy: simplicity, unity, explanation, beauty *

4.1 The problem

A scientific theory, in order to be accepted as a part of theoretical scientific knowledge, must be sufficiently:

(1) empirically successful; (2) empirically contentful; (3) simple, unified, explanatory, beautiful, elegant, harmonious, nonad hoc, conceptually coherent, invariant, symmetrical, organic, inwardly perfect, non-aberrant (all terms used in this context by scientists and philosophers of science).

It is important to note that this third non-empirical requirement plays a crucial role in science, especially in physics, to the extent, even, of persistently overriding empirical requirements. Given any accepted physical theory, T, however successful empirically, it will always be possible to concoct endlessly many empirically more successful theories, T 1 , T 2 , etc., if non-empirical requirements can be ignored. T will make endlessly many predictions concerning phenomena not yet observed. Rivals to T can be concocted by modifying T in ad hoc ways so that each rival makes a different prediction for some unobserved phenomenon. Then independently testable and corroborated hypotheses can be added to these rivals, the result being a series of theories, T 1 , T 2 , etc., which have all the empirical success of T, and have excess empirical content over T, this excess content being empirically corroborated. T 1 , T 2 , etc., are thus empirically more successful than T. Furthermore, almost all accepted physical theories run into empirical difficulties for some phenomena and are, on the face of it, refuted. T 1 , T 2 , etc., can be further modified in an entirely ad hoc, arbitrary fashion, so that these theories predict correctly the phenomena that ostensibly refute T, so that T 1 , T 2 , etc., are, in addition, empirically successful where T is refuted. In scientific practice, of course, these rivals to T, much more empirically successful than T, are never considered at all because of their failure to satisfy non-empirical requirements. The fact that such empirically more successful theories are persistently ignored because of their unacceptably ad hoc, complex, disunified character means that non-empirical considerations are persistently overriding empirical considerations in physics. 1 Non-empirical considerations thus play an irreplaceable and fundamental role in science. But what is this mysterious non-empirical feature of simplicity, unity, etc., that any acceptable scientific theory must possess? This is the problem I set out to solve in this chapter.

It deserves to be noted that this is an absolutely fundamental problem in the philosophy of science. The solution is required for (a) a specification of scientific method, and (b) the solution to the problem of induction. Both points are demonstrated by the point made above, namely that non-empirical considerations persistently override empirical considerations when it comes to the acceptance of scientific theories.

Non-empirical considerations can have a purely pragmatic role in science: in certain contexts, we choose one formulation over another, or even one theory over another, not because we judge our choice to be more likely to be true, but because it is such that the equations are easier to solve, it is easier to extract useful predictions from the choice we make. Here, I ignore such pragmatic considerations, at least initially, and concentrate exclusively on non-empirical requirements judged to be indicative of truth or knowledge (however fallibly).