It is easy to see that there are infinitely many such rivals to NT, just as empirically successful (at the moment) as NT. The predictions of NT may be represented as points in a multidimensional space, each point corresponding to some specific kind of system (there being infinitely many points). NT has only been verified (corroborated) for a minute region of this space. In order to concoct a (grossly ad hoc) rival to NT, which is just as empirically successful as NT, all we need do is identify some region in this space that includes no prediction of NT that has been verified, and then modify the laws of NT arbitrarily, for just that identified region.

The crucial question now is this: On what basis does bare falsificationism reject all these falsifiable but unfalsified rival theories? According to bare falsificationism, T 2 is to be accepted in preference to T 1 if T 1 has been falsified, T 2 has greater empirical content (is more falsifiable) than T 1 , T 2 successfully predicts all that T 1 successfully predicts, T 2 successfully predicts the phenomena that falsified T 1 , and T 2 successfully predicts new phenomena not predicted by T 1 (see Popper, 1959, pp. 81-4 and elsewhere). Given NT, it is a simple matter to concoct rival theories, of the above type, that satisfy all the above bare falsificationist requirements for being more acceptable than NT. Most accepted physical theories yield empirical predictions that clash with experiments, and thus are ostensibly falsified. We can always concoct new theories, in the way just indicated, doctored to yield the "correct" predictions. We can add on independently testable auxiliary postulates, thus ensuring that the new theory has greater empirical content than the old one. And no doubt this excess content will be corroborated. For details of how this can be done, seeSuch theories are, of course, grossly ad hoc, grossly "aberrant" as I have called them, but they satisfy Popper's (1959) requirements for being better theories than accepted physical theories.

It is worth noting that such "better" theories need not be quite as wildly ad hoc as the ones indicated above; sometimes such theories are actually put forward in the scientific literature, and yet are not taken seriously, even by their authors, let alone by the rest of the scientific community. An example is an ad hoc version of NT put forward by Maurice Levy in 1890, which combined in an ad hoc way two distinct modifications of Newton's law of gravitation, one based on the way Weber had proposed Coulomb's law should be modified, the other based on the way Riemann had proposed Coulomb's law should be modified (for details seeBy 1890, NT had been refuted by observation of the precession of the perihelion of the orbit of Mercury; attempts to salvage NT by postulating an additional planet, Vulcan, had failed. Levy's theory successfully predicted all the success of NT, and in addition successfully predicted the observed orbit of Mercury, just that which refuted NT; in addition, of course, it made predictions different from NT for further Sun-Mercury type systems not yet observed. Despite this, Levy's theory was not taken seriously for a moment, not even by Levy himself. How can bare falsificationism recommend rejection of such ad hoc versions of NT when they satisfy all the requirements of bare falsificationism for being more acceptable theories? No adequate answer is forthcoming, and it is this which spells the downfall of bare falsificationism-as Popper may himself have realized when he put forward dressed falsificationism in his C.R.

Note, again, that this criticism of Popper has nothing justificational about it whatsoever: it simply points to the drastic failure of bare falsificationism to do justice to what actually goes on in physics.

It may be objected that ad hoc rivals to NT of the kind just considered are so silly, so crackpot, that they do not deserve to be taken seriously within physics. 11 This is of course correct. The crucial point, however, is that bare falsificationism ought to be able to deliver this verdict, and this it singularly fails to do. Bare falsificationism actually declares of appropriately concocted ad hoc rivals to NT that these are better, more acceptable than NT.

But can a criticism of Popper that appeals to such silly, crackpot theories be taken seriously? I have two replies to this question. First, not all the ad hoc or aberrant variants are entirely silly. Levy's theory is perhaps an example. There are degrees of ad hocness, from the utterly crackpot and absurd, to a degree of ad hocness so slight, so questionable, in comparison, that the issue of whether the theory really is ad hoc or not may be hotly disputed by physicists themselves. (Such disputes arise especially during scientific revolutions.) This is an important point which will have a bearing on the argument of the next section. Second, it is, I submit, the very silliness of these crackpot theories that makes the above criticism of Popper so serious. If bare falsificationism favoured T 1 over T 2 , while most scientists favoured T 2 over T 1 , even though admitting that T 1 is nevertheless a good theory, almost as acceptable as T 2 , bare falsificationism would not be in such trouble. What is lethal for bare falsificationism is that it declares T 1 to be better than T 2 in circumstances where scientists themselves (and all of us) can see that T 2 is vastly superior to T 1 , T 1 being grossly ad hoc, aberrant, wholly crackpot and silly. Bare falsificationism favours theories that receive, and deserve, instant rejection: there could scarcely be a more decisive falsification of falsificationism than that.