This aspect of natural science, to which Kuhn fails entirely to do justice, is especially emphasized by AOE. According to AOE, revolutions in theoretical physics mark discontinuity at the level of theory, at level 2, and even discontinuity at level 3, but continuity at level 4. Physicalism, which asserts that underlying dynamic unity exists in nature, persists through revolutions-or, at least, has persisted through all revolutions in physics since Galileo. In order to make rational sense of natural science, we need to interpret the whole enterprise as seeking to turn physicalism, the assertion of underlying dynamic unity in nature,into a precise, unified, testable, physical "theory of everything". That, in a sentence, is what AOE asserts. Physicalism, according to AOE, despite its metaphysical (untestable) character, is the most secure item of theoretical knowledge in science; it is the most fruitful idea that science has come up with, at that level in the hierarchy of assumptions.

Because of its recognition that, despite the discontinuity of revolutions at levels 2 and 3, there is the continuity of the persistence of physicalism at level 4 (and of other theses at levels higher up in the hierarchy), AOE is able to resolve problems concerning the discovery and assessment of paradigms which Kuhn's view is quite unable to solve. Both fundamental physical theories and level 3 blueprints can be partially ordered with respect to how well they exemplify physicalism, entirely independent of ordinary empirical assessment. Assessing progress through revolution poses no problem for AOE. As we have seen, AOE solves the problem of verisimilitude.

I have already mentioned that AOE does not merely describe scientific practice; it carries implications as to how scientific practice can be improved. One such implication concerns scientific revolutions.gives a brilliant description of the way, during a scientific revolution, there is a breakdown of rationality, competing arguments for the rival paradigms being circular, and each presupposing what is being argued for. This is a feature of actual science. Scientists do not know how to assess competing theories objectively when empirical considerations are inconclusive. But all this can be seen to be a direct consequence of trying to do science without the explicit acknowledgement of persisting metaphysical assumptions concerning the comprehensibility of the universe, there thus being nothing available to constrain acceptance of theories when empirical considerations are inconclusive. Consider Kuhn's breakdown of rationality. A substantial revolution will involve, not just two rival paradigms or theories, T 1 and T 2 , but two rival blueprints, B 1 lurking behind T 1 , and B 2 lurking behind T 2. Granted B 1 , T 1 is far more acceptable than T 2 , but the reverse holds granted B 2. But B 1 and B 2 , being untestable, metaphysical theses, they are not explicitly discussable, and objectively assessable, within science; so they are more or less repressed, excluded from discussion. Nevertheless, scientists do think in terms of B 1 and B 2. Kuhn's Gestalt switch, involved in switching allegiance from T 1 to T 2 , can be pinpointed as the act of abandoning the old blueprint and adopting the new one. Non-empirical arguments in favour of T 1 or T 2 can only take the form of an appeal to B 1 or B 2 , in however a muffled a way (due to the point that blueprints are not open to explicit discussion). Such arguments will be circular, and entirely unconvincing to the opposition, in just the way described by Kuhn. Accept B 1 , and T 1 becomes the only possible choice; accept B 2 and T 2 is the only choice. Each side in the dispute is convinced that the other side is wrong, even incoherent. What needs to be done, and cannot be done, of course, is to discuss the relative merits of B 1 and B 2. Just this can be done, granted AOE. T 1 , B 1 , T 2 and B 2 can all be assessed from the standpoint of adequacy in exemplifying physicalism. When the scientific community adopts AOE, the Kuhnian irrationality of revolutions will disappear from science.

It may be asked how it is possible for AOE to be both more Popperian than Popper and more Kuhnian than Kuhn. The answer is that AOE is more Popperian that Popper in making explicit, and so criticizable, metaphysical theses which falsificationism denies, and thus leaves implicit and uncriticizable within science. But AOE is also more Popperian than Popper in insisting we need to exploit criticism critically, so that it furthers, and does not sabotage, the growth of knowledge. Criticism needs to be marshalled and directed at that part of our conjectural knowledge which it is, we conjecture, the most fruitful to criticize. This means directing critical fire at level 2 theories and level 3 blueprints, it being less likely, though still possible, that criticism of the level 4 thesis of physicalism will aid the growth of empirical knowledge. Physicalism has played an extraordinarily fruitful role in the advancement of scientific knowledge; it should not be abandoned unless an even more apparently fruitful idea is forthcoming, or unless the empirical and explanatory success that physicalism appears to have engendered turns out to be illusory. It is this persistence of physicalism, for good Popperian reasons, which gives to theoretical physics, and indeed to the whole of natural science, something of the character of Kuhn's normal science, with physicalism as its quasi-permanent "paradigm".