In order to make sense of the idea of severe testing in science, we need to see the experimentalist as having at least the germ of an idea for a rival theory up his sleeve (otherwise testing might degenerate into performing essentially the same experiment again and again). This means experiments are always crucial experiments, attempts at trying to decide between two competing theories. Theoretical pluralism is necessary for science to be genuinely empirical. And, more generally, in order to criticize an idea, one needs to have a rival idea in mind. Rationality, as construed by Popper, requires plurality of ideas, values, ways of life. Thus, for Popper, the rational society is the open society. Given pre-Popperian conceptions of reason, with their emphasis on proof rather than criticism (and associated plurality of ideas), the idea that the rational society is the open society is almost a contradiction in terms. There is thus a very close link between The Logic of Scientific Discovery, on the one hand, and The Open Society and Its Enemies, The Poverty of Historicism, and Conjectures and Refutations on the other.

And the direction of argument does not go in just one direction, from The Logic of Scientific Discovery to The Open Society and Its Enemies: it goes in the other direction as well. For in The Open Society and Its Enemies Popper argues that rationality, and scientific rationality as well, need to be conceived of in social and institutional terms(and the argument is echoed in The Poverty of Historicism, in connection with a discussion about the conditions required for scientific progress to be possible

10.2 The Enlightenment Programme

Much of the importance of Popper's first four books stems from the fact that they constitute a major contribution to what may be called "The Enlightenment Programme"-the basic idea of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment, especially the French Enlightenment, of learning from scientific progress how to achieve social progress towards an enlightened world.Popper's work does much to revitalize and improve on the version of the Enlightenment Programme that we have inherited from the eighteenth-century Enlightenment, from Voltaire, Diderot, Condorcet and the other philosophes. 3 But, as we shall see-and this is the main point of this chapter-Popper's version of the Enlightenment Programme, despite its great virtues, is still defective, and needs further improvement.

But before I discuss Popper's contribution, I want first to say a few words about how profoundly important the basic Enlightenment idea is of learning from scientific progress how to achieve social progress towards an enlightened world.

Science has made astonishing progress in improving knowledge. But social progress towards an enlightened world seems much more problematic. This discrepancy would be reason enough to take very seriously indeed the Enlightenment idea of seeing whether we can learn from scientific progress how to achieve greater social progress towards an enlightened world. But what makes this Enlightenment idea so much more important and urgent, for our times, is that all too often, and tragically, modern science and technology have actually been implicated in some of our worst human disasters. Modern science and technology have undoubtedly done much to help relieve human suffering and enhance the quality of human life; but there is still our terrible record of unnecessary human suffering and death, our record of man-made disasters during the past hundred years or so: horrifyingly destructive wars; the terrifying threat posed by modern armaments, conventional, chemical, biological and nuclear; vast inequalities in wealth around the globe; explosive population growth; the destruction of natural habitats and the rapid extinction of species; pollution of earth, sea and air, the latter leading to the impending devastation of climate change. And a crucial point to note about these global problems is that they have been made possible, have even, in a perfectly legitimate sense, been caused, 4 by the advent of modern science and technology. Without the amazing success of modern science and technology, they would not have happened. There is nothing surprising about this. New scientific knowledge and technological know-how enormously increase our power to act: in the absence of enlightenment, of wisdom, our new power to act will sometimes have good consequences, but will also, as often as not, have bad consequences, whether intended, as in war, or unintended, as in global warming. Before the advent of modern science, lack of wisdom, of enlightenment, did not matter too much; we lacked the power to do too much damage to ourselves and the planet. But now that we do have modern science, and the unprecedented powers that it has given us, lack of enlightenment puts us into a position of unprecedented peril. It may even be that our very survival depends on humanity learning a bit more wisdom. Instead of blaming science for our troubles, as many do, we need, rather, to see whether we can learn from the astonishing and dangerous success of science about how to acquire a bit more global wisdom.

The eighteenth-century philosophes interpreted the basic Enlightenment idea as requiring that the social sciences be developed alongside the natural sciences. Francis Bacon had already argued that, in order to better the lot of humanity, it is essential to improve our knowledge of the natural world. The philosophes, understandably enough, came to the conclusion that, in order to make social progress it is, if anything, even more important to improve knowledge of the social world. So they set about creating and developing the social sciences: economics, psychology, history, anthropology, sociology, political science. This was continued throughout the nineteenth century by such men as Saint-Simon, Comte, Mill and Marx until, by the mid-twentieth century, departments of these various social sciences, as conceived of by the eighteenth century, had been created in universities all over the world.