This conception of unity of theory, and the associated non-empirical methodological requirement for theory acceptance, fall naturally out of AOE, and are unproblematic when viewed from that standpoint. But granted SE, this conception of unity of theory, and associated methodological requirements, are unacceptable. For, in demanding that theoretical physics accepts this conception of unity, and implements the associated methods, one thereby commits physics to presupposing physicalism. That contradicts SE. Hence, those who take some version of SE for granted, cannot adopt this conception of theoretical unity.

Physicists and philosophers of physics have long been baffled by what theory unity is. Even Einstein was baffled (seeIn section 4.1, Chapter 4, I indicated some of the failed attempts that have been made to say what unity of theory really is.But all attempts to solve the problem within the framework of SE are doomed to fail. In order to solve the problem, one needs to abandon SE, accept that persistent preference for unified theories, in the relevant sense of "unified", means that physics makes a persistent metaphysical assumption about the nature of the universe, and thus follow the line of argument, spelled out above, which leads to AOE.

In short, the problem of induction cannot be solved, granted SE, partly because SE lacks rigour (to the extent of being inconsistent), partly because it cannot solve even the easiest part of the problem of induction-namely the methodological part. It cannot do this because it cannot specify those important, non-empirical methods that have to do with theoretical unity. AOE, by contrast, solves the purely methodological problem with ease.

Having failed to solve the methodological problem, it follows at once, of course, that falsificationism and other versions of SE all fail to solve the theoretical and practical problems of induction as well.

This has a bearing on the question of whether the problem of induction is solvable at all. Most contemporary philosophers, historians and sociologists of science seem to have concluded that the practical or justificational problem is unsolvable, just because repeated efforts to solve the problem seem to have got nowhere. But what the above point shows is that there is an entirely straightforward reason for this failure. All these failed attempts failed even to formulate the problem correctly! To do that one needs first to have identified the correct methods of science.

There is another way in which the problem may be misformulated so as to render it insoluble. The formulation may make epistemological demands that are so high that they are quite impossible to fulfil. One such formulation would be, "How can our confidence that empirically successful, accepted scientific theories are true be justified?" This makes impossibly high epistemological demands. All fundamental dynamical physical theories so far put forward, whatever empirical success they may have achieved, are false! 27 Formulated in this way, the problem is insoluble. A slightly less epistemologically ambitious formulation would be, "How can our confidence that the empirical predictions of empirically successful, accepted theories are true, be justified?" But this also asks for too much. All physical theories so far proposed, however empirically successful, yield false empirical predictions. A still less epistemologically ambitious formulation would be, "How can our confidence that empirically successful, accepted theories yield true empirical predictions, within the standard range of phenomena (and accuracy) for which they have already been shown to be successful, be justified?" But even this may ask for the impossible. Perhaps our customary confidence in science is misplaced. Perhaps just this is revealed by the correct solution to the practical or justificational problem.

In short, in order to avoid struggling to achieve the impossible, we need to formulate the problem in a somewhat more open-ended way than any of the above. The following stands a better chance of being solvable: How can our confidence that empirically successful, accepted theories yield true empirical predictions, within the standard range of phenomena (and accuracy) for which they have already been shown to be successful, be justified in so far as such confidence is justified?

We cannot just assume, from the outset, that the solution to the problem must justify our "pre-Humean" confidence in common sense and scientific knowledge-the confidence we had, that is, before learning of Hume's devastating arguments. For this may, again, be asking for the impossible. Perhaps Hume demonstrated, decisively, that such "preHumean" confidence is misplaced and unjustifiable. The correct solution to the justificational problem would, in this case, demonstrate just this to be the case. This, of course, is the view defended here.

We have seen that theoretical scientific knowledge makes assumptions about the cosmos. But there is more to it than that. Even very modest common-sense knowledge, such as, "I can walk across the room," or, "This room will endure for the next ten seconds," makes assumptions about the entire cosmos, about the nature of ultimate reality. Such very modest common-sense theses imply (a) that the entire cosmos is such that no cosmic explosion is occurring anywhere which will spread with nearly infinite speed to engulf and destroy the earth in the next few seconds.