

Extreme versions of specialism-such as logical positivismcondemn the four basic critical fundamentalist problems as metaphysical and evaluative, and therefore strictly meaningless. Less extreme versions of specialism merely place them outside the domain of intellectually respectable scientific, academic inquiry.

9.4 Universalism, specialism and intellectual standards

Universalism and specialism uphold diametrically opposed intellectual standards.

According to universalism, it is absolutely essential for the rationality, intellectual rigour and integrity of intellectual inquiry as a whole that sustained attention be given to the four basic problems. Indeed, this attention needs to be given intellectual priority over all else. All other intellectual activity needs to be subservient to the central and fundamental activity of imaginatively proposing and critically assessing possible answers to the four basic problems. Only in this case can even the most elementary of requirements for rational problem solving be realized.

According to specialism, on the other hand, rationality, intellectual rigour and integrity actually demand that the four "basic" problems of universalism be placed outside the domain of reputable intellectual inquiry. Mature science, authentic scholarship, genuine intellectual progress only really get underway when inconclusive philosophical debate about fundamental issues has been put firmly aside.One important aspect of this difference in intellectual standards is that universalism and specialism uphold different conceptions of intellectual progress.

According to universalism, intellectual progress is to be conceived in terms of the success that intellectual inquiry has in enabling us to improve our answers to the four fundamental problems, and to improve our capacity to tackle these problems in a rational fashion. One might say that universalism, ultimately, conceives of intellectual progress in personal and social terms-in that what is at issue are in fact the answers that people give to fundamental questions in their lives. Our assessment of intellectual progress will of course depend to some extent on the kind of tentative, broad answers that we give to these questions. Intellectual progress itself is no doubt something absolute and definite; our assessment of intellectual progress, however, is bound to be somewhat tentative, it being possible for there to be a number of different legitimate assessments.

According to specialism, on the other hand, intellectual progress is to be conceived in terms of the success that intellectual inquiry meets with in solving specialized, technical, scientific/ academic problems. Progress-or the lack of it-is thus something definite, uncontroversial, something about which there can be general agreement. This is especially true for science. According to specialism, all scientific problems are essentially problems we encounter in seeking to predict more and more phenomena more and more accurately. Thus scientific progress is to be assessed simply in terms of the success we meet with in developing laws and theories which predict more and more phenomena more and more accurately.9.5 Specialism: its dominance and untenability

Actual scientific, academic inquiry, as it exists at present, and has existed during the last hundred years or so, amounts to an uneasy admixture of universalism and specialism. In many ways, however, specialism predominates.

It must of course be acknowledged that some aspects of scientific, academic inquiry do exemplify critical fundamentalist standards. For example, there can be no doubt that science, technology and scholarship have made great progress when viewed from a universalist (or critical fundamentalist) perspective. The special and general theories of relativity and quantum theory have changed profoundly our conception of the physical universe. The theory of evolution, and subsequent developments since Darwin's day, have done much to improve our understanding of how we fit into the world and have come to be. Our whole conception of the cosmos has been utterly transformed during this period. Technological research has done much, potentially and actually, to provide us with the means to create a better human world. Research in history, archaeology, anthropology-and more questionably, research in other social sciences and humanities-has deepened our understanding of ourselves, our past, our potentialities.

In addition to this there have been many noteworthy "universalist" or "critical fundamentalist" thinkers who have consciously sought to help solve one or other of the four fundamental problems. Almost at random, one might mention Albert Einstein, Sigmund Freud, Erwin Schrödinger, Arthur Eddington, Bertrand Russell, Alfred North Whitehead, Henri Poincaré, Carl Gustav Jung, Erich Fromm, Margaret Mead, Karl Popper, Carl Sagan, Ernst Friedrich Schumacher, Ivan Illich, Thomas Szasz, Friedrich Hayek, Arthur Koestler, George Orwell, Theodore Roszak, Jane Goodall, Thomas Nagel, Lynn Margulis, Roger Penrose, Mark Lynas, Ronald Higgins, and of course many others also of varying repute.In many ways, however, the influence of universalism on actual scientific, academic practice is submerged beneath the massive influence of specialism on all but a minute proportion of scientific, academic work. Most scientists and scholars are specialists, concerned only to solve specialist problems not consciously conceived of as sub-problems of the four fundamental problems. Almost all scientific, academic publications are concerned with the resolution of specialist problems. Education is shaped primarily by specialist assumptions and standards, especially towards the upper end of the educational ladder, culminating as it does in the extreme specialism of the PhD thesis. Academic appointments, academic honours, academic success, are all judged in terms of specialist standards-apart from quite exceptional cases.