. Essentially the same point is made by, when he argues that economic thinking must reflect or presuppose some philosophy of life, some view as to what is of value in life. For the point that explicit articulation and criticism of value assumptions implicit in the aims of research is actually essential for the whole of science if it is to be objective and rational, see. Values are even implicit, it should be noted, in the aims of a science as apparently remote from ordinary life as pure theoretical physics. The question "What kind of world is this?", may be interpreted in such a fashion that merely developing theories, like quantum theory, which predict more and more phenomena more and more accurately constitutes satisfactory progress towards answering the question. Einstein asked for much more from theoretical physics: he sought to capture, in a "wildly speculative way" the "thoughts of God". He did not know that the universe has a coherent, unified structure; rather, the mere possibility of discovering such a structure seemed to him to be of such supreme value that to abandon the search for it seemed to be a profound betrayal of the noblest aspirations of theoretical physics. Thus Einstein's judgement that quantum theory is unsatisfactory, in that it abandons microrealism, was in part based on a value judgement. (For an endorsement of Einstein's judgement on this point see; see also Chapter 8 of the present book.) 38. A number of writers-for example,have advocated a view which might be called "metaphysical presuppositionism", according to which the natural sciences do make substantial metaphysical presuppositions about the world. These writers fail, however, to emphasize the crucial point that scientific rationality demands sustained, explicit, critical development of such metaphysical presuppositions as an integral pan of science itself-the essential tenet of universalism, and aim-oriented empiricism. 39. See. 40. On the one hand there are those who pursue sociology of science and "externalist" history of science merely in order to add to specialist knowledge within sociology and history. These writers tend to decry the significance of epistemology and the study of scientific method.

(A notable example of this is to be found in Bloor, 1976.) From the standpoint of the fundamentalist viewpoint defended in section 9.7, this approach entirely misses the point. For, according to the view advocated below, the basic task of the social sciences is to help us develop more rational institutions and ways of life, a more rational world. A central task of the social sciences, in other words, is to propose and critically assess possible institutional and social changes designed to help people all the better to discover and achieve what is of value in life-that is, to help people solve rationally the problems of living which they encounter in seeking to achieve that which is of value in life. The social sciences, on this view, ought thus fundamentally to be institutional or social epistemology or methodology. What is being attempted in this chapter in connection with one institution-the scientific, academic enterprise-should be attempted quite generally in connection with institutions associated with politics, the law, the media, commerce, industry and international relations. Far from the sociology of science taking over from the philosophy of science, on the contrary, sociology-and the social sciences quite generally-need to become the philosophy and methodology of institutional, social pursuits and enterprises. Granted that our concern is to develop better solutions to problems (3) and (4), a central task of the social sciences and humanities ought to be to help us develop fundamentalist, or aim-oriented rationalistic, institutions quite generally-including aim-oriented rationalistic academic institutions (see. On the other hand, however, there are those Marxist-inclined writers who wish to commit science to socialist or Marxist objectives and who seek to "radicalize" science (see, for example,. These writers see social and cultural reality in terms of competing class interests: the dominant class ensuring that even culture and science serve its own class interests, this situation being maintained, in part, by means of the institutionalized lie that science is an objective, value-neutral search for truth, serving no special class interests. There is clearly some truth in this allegation. The moment we view scientific and technological research on a worldwide basis, it becomes clear that very little such research is devoted to serving the interests of the millions upon millions of desperately poor people in the developing world. In so far as such research does serve social interests, it is the interests of those who live in industrially advanced, relatively wealthy countries which are served-even to the point of increasing the misery of the underprivileged, as in the case, perhaps, of the tin miners of Bolivia. The fundamental defect of this Marxist conception of intellectual inquiry, however, is that it commits intellectual inquiry to socialist or Marxist social theory and objectives, and thus prevents intellectual inquiry from itself scrutinizing these social, political and evaluative presuppositions, even to the point of improving on them.