

The second mistake is to suppose that simplicity, unity, etc., is a feature of the theory itself, its axiomatic structure, its simplicity of formulation, its number of postulates, its characteristic pattern of derivations, its number of adjustable constants. But all this involves looking at entirely the wrong thing. What one needs to look at is not the theory itself, but at the world, or rather at what the theory says about the world, the content of the theory, in other words. At a stroke, the worst aspect of the problem of what unity is vanishes. No longer does one face the terminological problem of unity-the problem of the formulation-dependent nature of unity. Suppose we have a given theory, T, which is formulated in N different ways, some formulations exhibiting T as beautifully unified, others as horribly complex and disunified, but all formulations being interpreted in precisely the same way, so as to make precisely the same assertion about the world. If unity has to do exclusively with content, then all these diverse formulations of T, having the same content, have precisely the same degree of unity. The variability of apparent unity with varying formulations of one and the same theory, T, (given some specific interpretation), which poses such an insurmountable problem for traditional approaches to the problem, poses no problem whatsoever for the thesis that unity has to do with content. Variability of formulation of a theory which leaves its content unaffected is wholly irrelevant: the unity of the theory is unaffected.

But now we have a new problem: How is the unity of the content of a theory to be assessed? What exactly does it mean to assert that a dynamical physical theory has a unified content?

What it means is that the theory has the same content throughout the range of possible phenomena to which the theory applies. Unity, in other words, means that there is just one content throughout the range of possible phenomena to which the theory applies. If the theory postulates different contents, different laws, for different ranges of possible phenomena, then the theory is disunified, and the more such different contents there are, so the more disunified the theory is. Thus "unity" means "one", and "disunity" means "more than one", the disunity becoming worse and worse as the number of different contents goes up, from two to three to four, and so on. Not only does this enable us to distinguish between "unified" and "disunified" theories, it enables us to assign "degrees of unity" to theories, or to partially order theories with respect to their degree of unity.To give an elementary example, Newton's theory of gravitation, F = GM 1 M 2 / d 2 is unified in that what the theory asserts is the same throughout all possible phenomena to which it applies (all bodies of all possible masses, whatever their constitution, shape, relative velocity or distance apart, at all times and places). An aberrant version of this theory, which asserts that F = GM 1 M 2 / d 2 for times t ≤ t 0 , where t 0 is some definite time, and F = GM 1 M 2 / d 3 for times t > t 0 , is disunified, because what the theory asserts is not the same throughout the range of possible phenomena to which the theory applies.

Note that special terminology could be introduced to make Newtonian theory look disunified, and the aberrant version of Newtonian theory look unified. All we need do is interpret d N to mean "d N if t ≤ t 0 and d N+1 if t > t 0 ". In terms of this (admittedly somewhat bizarre) terminology, the aberrant theory has the form "F = GM 1 M 2 / d 2 ", and Newtonian theory has the "aberrant" form "F = GM 1 M 2 / d 2 for times t ≤ t o and F = GM 1 M 2 / d for times t > t o ". But this mere terminological reversal of aberrance or disunity does not affect the content of the two theories: the content of Newtonian theory remains unified, and the content of the aberrant version (which looks unified) remains disunified.

This almost suffices to solve the problem. A little more needs to be added, however, because in practice in physics, assessments of degrees of unity are somewhat more complex than I have indicated so far, owing to the following consideration. In assessing the extent to which a theory is disunified we may need to consider how different, or in what way different, one from another, the different contents of a theory are. A theory that postulates different laws at different times and places is disunified in a much more serious way than a theory that postulates the same laws at all times and places, but also postulates that distinct kinds of physical particle exist, with different dynamical properties, such as charge or mass. This second theory still postulates different laws for different ranges of possible phenomena: laws of one kind for possible physical systems consisting of one type of particle, and slightly different laws for possible physical systems consisting of another type of particle. But this second kind of difference in content is much less serious than the first kind (which involves different laws at different times and places).