

In chapter two, Popper argues that philosophical problems have their roots in science and mathematics; and he argues against the Wittgensteinian view that philosophical problems are pseudo-problems that arise when ordinary language is misused.

In chapter three Popper distinguishes three views concerning human knowledge: essentialism, which holds that science can grasp the ultimate essence of things; instrumentalism, which holds that scientific theories are merely instruments for the prediction of observable phenomena; and realism, which holds that science puts forward falsifiable conjectures about aspects of reality that often go beyond what is observable. Popper criticizes the first two views, and defends the third view.

In chapter five Popper gives a magnificent account of the Presocratic philosophers-Thales, Anaximander, Anaximenes, Heraclitus, Parmenides-as proposing and critically assessing successive theories about the origins and ultimate constituents of the universe, and about the problem of how to understand change. The Presocratics, Popper argues, almost unintentionally created critical rationality, the tradition of proposing bold conjectures which are then subjected to criticism-a tradition that led eventually to modern science.

In chapter eight Popper tackles the problem of how philosophical or metaphysical doctrines can be rationally assessed given that they cannot be empirically falsified, like scientific theories. His solution is that philosophical doctrines can be assessed from the standpoint of the problems that they are intended to solve; even though irrefutable, they can nevertheless be criticized from the standpoint of the problems they seek to solve.

In chapter ten Popper restates and, as we have seen above, develops somewhat his falsificationist conception of scientific method. In this chapter Popper formulates and tries to solve what has subsequently come to be known as the problem of verisimilitude: What can we mean by scientific progress if science advances from one false theory to another? Popper's solution is that, given two theories, T 1 and T 2 , even though both are false, nevertheless T 2 , say, may be closer to the truth than T 1. Suppose, for example, that T 2 implies everything true that T 1 implies and more besides, but T 2 does not imply anything false that T 1 does not imply. Granted this, there is a perfectly good sense in which T 2 can be said to be "closer to the truth" than T 1 , and thus an advance over T 1. Unfortunately it was subsequently shown bythat this proposed solution to the problem does not work. If T 2 has more true implications than T 1 does, then T 2 , necessarily, has some false implications which T 1 does not have. Popper's requirements for T 2 to be closer to the truth than T 1 , when both are false, cannot be satisfied.

Chapter fifteen provides an exposition and decisive criticism of dialectic reasoning: it is thus an adjunct to the criticisms of Hegel and Marx to be found in O.S.E.

One of the themes running through C.R., and through much of Popper's subsequent writings, is that the proper task of philosophy is to tackle, in an imaginative and critical way, real, fundamental problems having their roots outside philosophy in science, politics, art, life. This Popperian conception of philosophy stands in sharp contrast both to the pomposities and obscurities of much so-called "continental" philosophy, and to the poverty and aridity of philosophy in the so-called "analytic" tradition, which is restricted to ordinary language analysis, the analysis of meaning. Popper has fought against both rival conceptions of philosophy, and has sought to put into practice his own critical rationalist, problem-solving conception of philosophy. His first four books are exemplary in this respect, and have undoubtedly exercised an enormous, healthy influence on much subsequent philosophy, even though this influence has often not been acknowledged. A basic impulse behind these works might almost be summed up in a stray remark tossed out in O.S.E.: "We have to learn the lesson that intellectual honesty is fundamental for everything we cherish", vol. 2, p. 59).

1.9 The basic argument running through Popper's early work

It is important to appreciate the existence of a central backbone of argument running through these four books. In L.Sc.D., as we have seen, Popper argues that all scientific knowledge is irredeemably conjectural in character, it being impossible to verify theories empirically. Science makes progress by proposing bold conjectures in response to problems, which are then subjected to sustained attempted empirical refutation. This falsificationist conception of scientific method is then generalized to form Popper's conception of (critical) rationality, a general methodology for solving problems or making progress. As Popper puts it in L.Sc.D.: "inter-subjective testing is merely a very important aspect of the more general idea of inter-subjective criticism, or in other words, of the idea of mutual rational control by critical discussion", note 1*). But in order to make sense of the idea of severe testing in science, we need to see the experimentalist as having at least the germ of an idea for a rival theory up his sleeve (otherwise testing might degenerate into performing essentially the same experiment again and again). This means experiments are always crucial experiments, attempts at trying to decide between two competing theories. Theoretical pluralism is necessary for science to be genuinely empirical. And, more generally, in order to criticize an idea, one needs to have a rival idea in mind. Rationality, as construed by Popper, requires plurality of ideas, values, ways of life. Thus, for Popper, the rational society is the open society.