Further details about Creative Commons licenses are available at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ ISBN: 978-1-787350-40-3 (Hbk.) ISBN: 978-1-787350-41-0 (Pbk.) ISBN: 978-1-787350-39-7 (PDF) ISBN: 978-1-787350-38-0 (epub) ISBN: 978-1-787350-37-3 (mobi) ISBN: 978-1-787350-36-6 (html)

Here is an idea that just might save the world. It is that science, properly understood, provides us with the methodological key to the salvation of humanity. A version of this idea can be found in the works of Karl Popper. Famously, Popper argued that science cannot verify theories but can only refute them, and this is how science makes progress. Scientists are forced to think up something better, and it is this, according to Popper, that drives science forward.

But Nicholas Maxwell finds a flaw in this line of argument. Physicists only ever accept theories that are unified-theories that depict the same laws applying to the range of phenomena to which the theory applies-even though many other empirically more successful disunified theories are always available. This means that science makes a problematic assumption about the universe, namely that all disunified theories are false. Without some such presupposition as this, the whole empirical method of science breaks down.

By proposing a new conception of scientific methodology, which can be applied to all worthwhile human endeavours with problematic aims, Maxwell argues for a revolution in academic inquiry to help humanity make progress towards a better, more civilized and enlightened world.

Nicholas Maxwell taught philosophy of science for 30 years at UCL, where he is now Emeritus Reader. He has published 10 books, including How Universities Can Help Create a Wiserand In Praise of Natural Philosophy (2017).

implications for political and social issues, for the nature of social inquiry and the humanities, and indeed for academic inquiry as a whole. The strategies for tackling social problems that arise from aim-oriented rationalism improve on Popper's recommended strategies of piecemeal social engineering and critical rationalism, associated with his conception of the open society. This book thus sets out to develop Popper's philosophy in new and fruitful directions. The theme of the book, in short, is to discover what can be learned from scientific progress about how to achieve social progress towards a better world. That there is indeed much to be learned from scientific progress about how to achieve social progress was the big idea of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment. This was immensely influential. But the philosophes of the Enlightenment made mistakes, and these mistakes, inherited from the Enlightenment, are built into the institutional and intellectual structure of academic inquiry today. In his two great works, The Logic of Scientificand The Open Society and Its, Popper corrected some of the mistakes of the Enlightenment-mistakes about the nature of scientific method and rationality. But Popper left other mistakes undetected and uncorrected. The present book seeks to push the Popperian research programme further, and correct what Popper left uncorrected.

The fundamental idea that emerges is that there is an urgent need to bring about a revolution in academic inquiry so that it takes up its proper task of promoting wisdom and not just acquiring knowledgewisdom being the capacity to realize what is of value in life for oneself and others, thus including knowledge and technological know-how, but much else besides. I have devoted much of my working life to trying to get this idea across. The essays that follow provide a record of this life work.

Most philosophers of science see their work as contributing to a meta-discipline. The object of study is science, and the task is to describe, explain and understand this object. It is no more the proper task of the philosopher of science to criticize science, or to make suggestion as to how science can be improved, than it is the task of the astronomer to criticize the moon. But this standard meta-discipline way of conceiving the subject entirely misconstrues what ought to be the proper relationship between science and the philosophy of science. A major implication of the view to be expounded and defended here, aim-oriented empiricism, is that the rationality of science requires that the philosophy of science-critical exploration of views concerning the aims and methods of science-is an integral, influential part of science itself, both being influenced by, and influencing, science. In other words, in order to be rigorous, science must include some imaginative and critical exploration of problematic aims and methods. The very act of setting up the philosophy of science as a meta-discipline, distinct from science itself, looking down on science from above, as it were, describing and seeking to explain and understand what goes on, but in no way interfering with, contributing to or criticizing science, serves to undermine the very thing the discipline seeks to understand, namely the rationality of science. The orthodox meta-discipline approach not only makes the subject sterile (in that it can have nothing to contribute to science itself), it makes it quite impossible to solve the fundamental problem of the discipline-the rationality of science. Indeed, the discipline, so conceived, actually becomes the source of a pervasive and damaging irrationality in science.I make no apology, therefore, for criticizing science, for attempting to contribute to and improve science, in what follows. Philosophy of science pursued within the framework of aim-oriented empiricism might be compared to the work Weierstrass, Dedekind and others did in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century in bringing greater rigour to mathematics: they made mathematics more rigorous, and contributed to mathematics itself, at one and the same time. Somewhat analogously, I seek to increase the rigour of science, and make a contribution to science at the same time. I might add that in criticizing science and suggesting how it might be improved (made more rigorous and of greater human value) I am again developing a tendency to be found scattered among Popper's works. Despite-or perhaps because of-his great admiration for science at its best, Popper does not shrink from criticizing what he sees as deplorable aspects of science: specialization, authoritarianism, submission to mere intellectual fashion, failure to grapple with the fundamental problems of cosmology. Again, Popper depicts graphically some of the bad consequences, for science itself, of attempting to put bad inductivist methods into scientific practice. But all this is paradoxically at odds with a major tenet of Popper's philosophy of science, namely his proposed solution to the problem of demarcation. Popper holds that an idea, in order to be scientific, must be empirically falsifiable. Philosophies of science, because they are not empirically falsifiable, are not a part of science. They are to be severely demarcated from science. Thus Popper, in actively criticizing aspects of science, violates the precepts of his own philosophy of science. All this changes dramatically once Popper's philosophy of science has been amended to become the doctrine espoused here, aim-oriented empiricism.