In a letter to Schrödinger in 1950, Einstein expresses himself even more emphatically:

You are the only contemporary physicist, besides Laue, who sees that one cannot get around the assumption of reality-if only one is honest. Most of them simply do not see what sort of risky game they are playing with reality-reality as something independent of what is experimentally established. They somehow believe that the quantum theory provides a description of reality, and even a complete description; this interpretation is, however, refuted, most elegantly by your system of radioactive atom + Geiger counter + amplifier + charge of gun powder + cat in a box, in which the -function of the system contains the cat both alive and blown to bits. Is the state of the cat to be created only when a physicist investigates the situation at some definite time? Nobody really doubts that the presence or absence of the cat is something independent of the act of observation. But then the description by means of the -function is certainly incomplete, and there must be a more complete description. If one wants to consider the quantum theory as final (in principle), then one must believe that a more complete description would be useless because there would be no laws for it. If that were so then physics could only claim the interest of shopkeepers and engineers; the whole thing would be a wretched bungle.Einstein's opposition to OQT-arising from the lack of realism of the theory-was implacable, even vehement. It was this, after all, which had led to the great rupture between mainstream theoretical physics and Einstein's own work. From 1905 to 1926 Einstein was at the centre of developments in theoretical physics. But from 1926 onwards the ways parted, essentially because Einstein was not able to bring himself to contribute to the development of OQT (confining himself to critical analysis of it). Robert Shankland, who met Einstein a number of times during the years 1950-4, has remarked on the uncharacteristic vehemence of Einstein's opposition to OQT:

His well-known scepticism on this subject [of quantum mechanics] was clearly evident and his comments on both the subject itself and its leading proponents were often highly critical and even emotional, in contrast to his restrained and quiet explanations of relativity.Something of the strength of Einstein's opposition to OQT also emerges from a correspondence which he had with Born on the subject. Einstein makes it quite clear that he finds OQT unacceptable because of its lack of realism. Born persists in a stance of somewhat patronizing incomprehension, Einstein rather sharply writes that he does not wish to continue the discussion, and Pauli is obliged to step in and tick Born off for misunderstanding Einstein, even though he agrees with Born that Einstein's position amounts to asking "how many angels are able to sit on the point of a needle" (see

The strongest statement of Einstein against OQT that I have come across is quoted by Fine (1986, p. 1): "This theory [the present quantum theory] reminds me a little of the system of delusions of an exceedingly intelligent paranoiac, concocted of incoherent elements of thoughts." These quotations establish beyond all possible doubt that Einstein was committed to full-blooded scientific realism, at least as far as the basic aim of physics is concerned.Einstein is absolutely correct to hold that OQT cannot be interpreted realistically. As he points out in his letter to Schrödinger, if one attempts to interpret the -function of OQT as providing a complete description of reality, one is led to the (apparently) absurd conclusion that Schrödinger's cat persists as a superposition of being alive and being dead until we open the box and look. And similarly, we would have to conclude that the outcome of any quantum measurement is not some definite state of the apparatus but rather a superposition of macroscopically distinct states-the superposition only collapsing miraculously when we look. The simplest way to demonstrate the impossibility of interpreting OQT realistically, however, arises from the following consideration. If we interpret the -function as describing quantum reality directly, and exclude measurement from the basic postulates of the theory, we are left with a theory that is fully deterministic, since quantum states, corresponding to -functions, evolve deterministically in accordance with Schrödinger's equation. Such a version of OQT fails to make contact with the most basic feature of the quantum world-its probabilistic character. In short, just as Einstein declares, OQT must be regarded as a theory which makes probabilistic predictions about the results of performing measurements on systems, but which does not specify the actual physical state of the individual system in the absence of measurement.How did this extraordinary state of affairs arise? Essentially because, as quantum theory (QT) developed with the work of Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, Born and others, no solution was found to the quantum wave/ particle problem. As we have seen, this problem was first discovered by Einstein with his invention of light quanta-or "photons" as they subsequently came to be called. The problem was further intensified in 1923 when de Broglie proposed that electrons, up till then believed to be particles, have a wave-like aspect associated with them, as was subsequently confirmed experimentally by Davisson and Germer. In order to develop QT as a realistic theory, it would have been necessary to solve the quantum wave/ particle problem in such a way that it is possible to specify, consistently and precisely, what sort of physical entities photons and electrons are as they evolve in space and time independently of measurement. This did not happen. Instead, Heisenberg invented matrix mechanics in 1925, intending, from the outset, that the theory should predict the outcome of measurements but should remain silent about what exists physically in the absence of measurement. Schrödinger invented wave mechanics in 1926 with the hope that the wave aspect of quantum entities would turn out to be fundamental. This hope was dashed when it became clear that the -function could not be regarded as describing quantum reality directly, but had to be interpreted as containing probabilistic information about the results of performing measurements on an ensemble of similarly prepared systems-as Born was the first to point out.