, and becomes merely the impersonal, institutional, ritualistic prediction of phenomena, 'the whole thing ... a wretched bungle' which can 'only claim the interest of shopkeepers and engineers'.. Personal awareness of what is significant and of value in existence, intellectual passion, curiosity, wonder, all degenerate into nothing more than the possession of information and expert skills, the accumulation of dry knowledge of fact. As a result of dissociating "pure" intellectual inquiry from life, we lose sight of the value which intellectual inquiry has when pursued for its own sake.

Above all, and quite generally, as a result of engaging in, and thinking in terms of, intellectual inquiry as in the first instance the pursuit of impersonal knowledge, we lose sight of those problems which, quite fundamentally, create the need for intellectual inquiry, and which intellectual inquiry ought fundamentally to be helping us to solve. By giving priority to the pursuit of impersonal knowledge, we fail to emphasize the fundamental character of the personal and social problems of our pluralistic world. Intellectual inquiry must then fail to enhance our common understanding of these problems and our common capacity to develop more adequate resolutions to them. Conceiving of things in terms of the pursuit of impersonal knowledge, we fail entirely to see the urgent need to develop intellectual inquiry as the critical fundamentalist tribal discussion of humanity, as a vital part of all our lives, as a personal and social reality, as a part of the world, designed to help us create wiser ways of living, wiser institutions, a wiser world.

Whereas the philosophy of wisdom, in short, in subordinating intellectual inquiry to the needs of life of value, does justice to both the pragmatic and the cultural aspects of intellectual inquiry, in a unified way, 53 the philosophy of knowledge fails to do justice to both aspects.

Specialism is a relatively recent phenomenon, a general intellectual malaise that has progressively overtaken scientific, academic inquiry during the last hundred years or so, and especially during the last fifty years. The natural philosophers of the seventeenth century, the philosophes of the eighteenth century, and many scientists, philosophers and social thinkers of the nineteenth century had no difficulty in conceiving and pursuing intellectual inquiry in broadly critical fundamentalist terms (even if epistemological and methodological misconceptions prevented them from having a full understanding of the rationale for universalism indicated here).

I have argued in this last section that there is nevertheless an even deeper intellectual and humanitarian malaise inherent in scientific, academic inquiry, which cannot by any means be construed as a relatively recent phenomenon. On the contrary, it goes back to the origins of modern science some four hundred years ago and can even be traced back to the ancient Greeks of over two thousand years ago. It is built into the very foundations of the Western tradition. It can be put like this. Intellectual inquiry has been pursued in accordance, not with the philosophy of wisdom, but rather with the philosophy of knowledge. Instead of problems (3) and (4) of section 9.2 being taken as fundamental, problems (1) and (2) being tackled as an aspect of, and subordinate to, problems (3) and (4), on the contrary, scientific, academic inquiry has been devoted primarily to solving problems (1) and

, solutions to aspects of these problems incidentally helping people in social life to develop improved answers to problems (3) and (4) (or so it is hoped). Instead of problems (3) and (4) being held to constitute the central problems of intellectual inquiry, on the contrary, these problems have been ostracized from rational inquiry, relegated to the domain of the personal and the political, solutions to them being determined by such "irrational" factors as subjective emotion and motivation, political power, market forces.

But if present-day scientific, academic inquiry really is damagingly irrational in the quite elementary and fundamental way indicated, how, it may be asked, is it possible? How can such a wholesale, fundamental irrationality have been tolerated for so long? It is not difficult to understand why in the seventeenth century questions concerning the value of life should not have been open to rational discussion: the combined power of church and state made it impossible. (One only has to remember the difficulties encountered by Galileo, Descartes and others in seeking to establish the principle that relatively neutral problems concerning the nature of the material universe should be open to non-authoritarian, rational discussion, to realize that any attempt to establish an analogous principle in connection with problems concerning the meaning and value of life was, at the time, out of the question.) The philosophes of the eighteenth century sought to devote reason to the enhancement of human enlightenment, human progress; unfortunately, and understandably, being over-impressed by Bacon and Newton, they failed to emphasize, clearly and unambiguously, that intellectual priority needs to be given to wisdom rather than to knowledge. Romantic writers of the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries can be interpreted as emphasizing the priority of questions concerning life of value. Unfortunately, in doing so, they abandoned "reason" under the mistaken impression that reason is relevant only for the acquisition of impersonal knowledge of truth, and that it involves the repression of personal feelings, desires and imagination. The question we need to ask is this: Why were these past failures not put right in the twentieth century? Why have we still not put them right, in the twenty-first century? A major part of the answer is, I suggest, the increasing prevalence of specialism, which has cancelled the very possibility of critical, influential discussion of fundamentals. Indeed, the existing fundamental disorganization of contemporary scientific, academic inquiry, with its elevation of knowledge above wisdom, is just what one would expect from putting specialism into practice-as the house analogy indicates. Indeed the pursuit of knowledge dissociated from the pursuit of wisdom is itself the outcome of a kind of specialism-the tackling of impersonal, objective or institutional problems of knowledge dissociated from those more fundamental personal and interpersonal problems that face us in our search for what is, or can be, of value in existence. This elementary irrationality inherent in our official, public thinking about the world and ourselves is at the root of our present failure, as indicated by Higgins and others, to tackle our fundamental problems effectively and humanely. It is this that is responsible for the "glaring contrast" noticed by Martin Luther King.