It turns out that the thesis that light does have the same velocity in all inertial reference frames-which is implied by P 1 plus P 2-suces to fix uniquely just how the coordinates of R 1 and R 2 are related. All that we need, in addition, is that the relationship is symmetric (which may be said to be inherent in P 1 in any case), linear and isotropic. With these assumptions it is not hard to show that the coordinates of R 1 and R 2 are related by the following equations, the "Lorentz" transformations:

According to these equations, all but uniquely determined by P 1 plus P 2 , relative motion contracts rods and makes clocks go slow, but in such a way that the velocity of light is c in all inertial frames. The miracle of reconciling P 1 and P 2 has been achieved.

Special relativity has a number of startling implications. One is that mass, along with the speed of clocks and length of objects, is aected by uniform motion, so that m 2 = m 1 /(l-v 2 /c 2 ) 1/2 , where m 1 is the mass of an object in rest frame R 1 , with respect to which the object is at rest, and m 2 is the mass of an object in R 2. Another implicationthe most famous of all-is that mass is a form of energy, in accordance with E = mc 2 .

From the standpoint of aim-oriented empiricism, special relativity is doubly significant. First, the way in which Einstein discovered special relativity exemplifies the method of discovery of aim-oriented empiricism, to the extent that Einstein used the method IIhave indicated above::namely, creating a new theory as the outcome of resolving a clash between two existing theoriess-thus creating greater conceptual and theoretical unification. Second, and quite strikingly, special relativity itself exemplifies aim-oriented empiricism, and in an important sense cannot be adequately understood within the framework of standard empiricism. For, as Einstein himself remarks in his "Autobiographical Notes", two pages on from the quotation givennabove:

The universal principle of the special theory of relativity is contained in the postulate:: The laws of physics are invariant with respect to the Lorentz-tranformations  This is a restricting principle for natural laws, comparable to the restricting principle of the non-existence of the perpetuum mobile which underlies thermodynamics.Special relativity is thus a law of laws, a meta-law, a guiding principle, a heuristic and methodological rule to be employed in discovering and assessing physical theories-above all, for Einstein in 1905, to be employed as a heuristic tool for the discovery of the new theory to unify classical mechanics and electrodynamics. (When viewed from this perspective, what Einstein did in creating special relativity was to take a basic restricting principle of Newtonian mechanics, namely Galilean invariance-the pre-relativistic way to interpret P 1-and modify this to make it compatible with P 2 , thus forming a new restrictive principle, P 3 , i.e. Lorentz invariance.) As a heuristic and methodological principle, special relativity has amply fulfilled Einstein's hopes for it. It played a vital role in the discovery of de Broglie's wave theory of matter, the so-called Klein-Gordon equation (first discovered by Schrödinger), the Dirac equation of the electron, quantum electrodynamics, quantum electro weak theory and quantum chromodynamics. In a modified form, it played a crucial role in the discovery of general relativity; and it continues to be relevant to superstring theory. Here, then, is a heuristic and methodological principle of enormous fruitfulness for all of theoretical physics, which can be formulated as the demand that acceptable theories must be Lorentz invariant. This demand-equivalent to the demand that space-time be Minkowskian (in the formulation of theories)-is not merely a methodological principle for, as we have seen, it has substantial physics in it. Special relativity is capable of being falsified and, from the standpoint of general relativity, it is false. All this is very hard to make sense of, or do justice to, within the confines of any version of standard empiricism, precisely because standard empiricism rejects the idea that methodological principles have physics, or metaphysics, built into themthere being, within standard empiricism, no (level 2) metamethodological framework within which rival (level 1) methodological principles can be rationally assessed. From the standpoint of aim-oriented empiricism, there is no difference in principle between an ordinary methodological rule, such as position invariance (acceptable laws and theories must be invariant with respect to change of position in space), and full Lorentz invariance. To both there correspond substantial physical or metaphysical principles, namely "space selects out no special position" or "spacetime selects out no special inertial reference frame". Both may be false, and both therefore require critical scrutiny as science develops, in accordance with aim-oriented empiricism, and not dogmatic acceptance or rejection, as required by standard empiricism, with its fixed set of methodological principles (which no one yet has been able to formulate!). Standard empiricism differentiates sharply between the status of position and Lorentz invariance-only the former qualifying as a methodological rule of physics, the latter belonging exclusively to the content of physics, as a physical theory. But this does violence to Einstein's achievement; it does violence to the new way of doing physics inspired by Einstein, which precisely exploits the fruitful interplay between new theories and new heuristic and methodological principles (along the lines stipulated by aim-oriented empiricism).