Third, if McAllister's argument were successful, so that giving preference to theories that exhibit type (2) explanatory power could be justified by an appeal to the aim of empirical adequacy, then this would be a disaster for MAI, for it would obviate entirely the need for science to consider aesthetic properties of theories, and to employ the aesthetic induction. As I have argued above, all aesthetic properties of theories that have any methodological significance can be derived from the demand for unity-that is, the demand for type (2) explanatory power. Once type (2) explanatory power is acknowledged to be methodologically significant, no other aesthetic properties of theories are required by science.

I conclude this section by mentioning three further differences between AOE and MAI.

First, reasons given in defence of MAI for holding that aesthetic considerations are methodologically significant in science arise from the fact that scientists themselves have stressed their importance, and they do indeed seem to influence what theories are chosen in science. Reasons given in defence of AOE for holding that type (c) non-empirical considerations are methodologically important are much stronger: science becomes impossible if such considerations are not deployed to rule out endlessly many empirically successful but grossly ad hoc theories. Second, MAI, despite being a contribution to the rationalist conception of science, does not provide a basis for systematically correcting scientific practice. But AOE does. As I have already remarked, if a view genuinely increases our understanding of science, it would be surprising if it did not have implications for scientific practice. AOE passes this test, in emphasizing the need for explicit articulation of metaphysical theses at levels 3 and 4, and explicit tackling of the problems thereby generated.

Third, MAI and AOE conceive of the relationship between science and the philosophy of science differently. MAI takes the conventional view for granted: philosophy of science is a meta-discipline which seeks to spell out and justify methods implicit in successful scientific practice, but which is quite distinct from science itself. AOE upholds the unorthodox view that the philosophy of science is an integral part of science itself, influenced by and seeking to influence science, articulating and critically assessing actual and possible aims and methods for science, at various levels, the fundamental aim being to contribute to scientific progress. A new level 3 aim for physics, i.e. a new blueprint, plus associated new methods, might constitute a major contribution to theoretical physics, as well as being a contribution to the philosophy of physics. Einstein's special theory of relativity is an example. It puts forward both a modified blueprint (Newtonian space-time becoming Minkowskian space-time), and modified methods (Galilean invariance becoming Lorentz invariance): it is thus a major contribution to physics itself, which is also a contribution to the aims and methods of physics-that is, to the philosophy of physics.

6.4 Assessment

Which is to be preferred, AOE or MAI? The two views need not, of course, be regarded as rivals. AOE is a highest-level model, whereas MAI is a medium-level model; one could consider accommodating MAI within AOE. This would require, however, that MAI be modified quite extensively, as the previous section has shown.

Interpreting AOE and MAI as rival rationalist accounts of science, my chief criticism of MAI is that it is a version of SE, and thus suffers from the defects that all versions of SE suffer from. Given any empirically successful theory, T, there will always be endlessly many ad hoc rivals to T, even more empirically successful than T, which will never even be considered within science, let alone considered and rejected. In persistently rejecting such ad hoc rivals, even more empirically successful than T, science makes a persistent assumption about the nature of the universe. This contradicts SE-and contradicts MAI.McAllister might seek to evade this conclusion by arguing, as he does in his book, that non-empirical, aesthetic criteria that rule out acceptance of empirically successful, ad hoc rival theories, are too diverse in character, too changeable over time, to amount to the implicit acceptance of any persistent assumption. But such an argument collapses the moment one takes into account radically ad hoc theories of the kind considered in this book, in Chapters 2 and 5, and inRejection (or rather complete neglect) of such radically ad hoc theories persists throughout revolutions and all changes in aesthetic fashions in science. The persistent rejection of such theories unquestionably commits science to making a substantial metaphysical assumption about the nature of the universe.

McAllister might, at this point, appeal to the pragmatic justification of induction of Braithwaite and Mellor, already referred to aboveAccording to this argument, science proceeds, and is justified in proceeding, as if it assumes there are regularities to be discovered, but does not actually assume that regularities exist. But even if this argument is valid, it does not in any way invalidate my point above, that in persistently rejecting empirically successful ad hoc theories, science implicitly makes a persistent metaphysical assumption about the world. It should be noted that kinds of ad hoc theories can be formulated that specify regularities, in that these theories are invariant with respect to position and time (no specific places or times being specified by the theories). These theories might be said to specify ad hoc regularities. But, in any case, the Braithwaite-Mellor attempt at solving the problem of induction does not succeed. Restricting science to the search for regularities is both too narrow, and not narrow enough. Too narrow, because it is conceivable that we can live and acquire knowledge but not by searching for regularities in phenomena. God might get in touch with us, explain His purposes, keep us informed about what is going to happen. Getting in touch with God by means of prayer and meditation, and not by searching for regularities, might be the way to acquire knowledge; and various other science fiction possibilities can be imagined (see