Special relativity is thus a law of laws, a meta-law, a guiding principle, a heuristic and methodological rule to be employed in discovering and assessing physical theories-above all, for Einstein in 1905, to be employed as a heuristic tool for the discovery of the new theory to unify classical mechanics and electrodynamics. (When viewed from this perspective, what Einstein did in creating special relativity was to take a basic restricting principle of Newtonian mechanics, namely Galilean invariance-the pre-relativistic way to interpret P 1-and modify this to make it compatible with P 2 , thus forming a new restrictive principle, P 3 , i.e. Lorentz invariance.) As a heuristic and methodological principle, special relativity has amply fulfilled Einstein's hopes for it. It played a vital role in the discovery of de Broglie's wave theory of matter, the so-called Klein-Gordon equation (first discovered by Schrödinger), the Dirac equation of the electron, quantum electrodynamics, quantum electro weak theory and quantum chromodynamics. In a modified form, it played a crucial role in the discovery of general relativity; and it continues to be relevant to superstring theory. Here, then, is a heuristic and methodological principle of enormous fruitfulness for all of theoretical physics, which can be formulated as the demand that acceptable theories must be Lorentz invariant. This demand-equivalent to the demand that space-time be Minkowskian (in the formulation of theories)-is not merely a methodological principle for, as we have seen, it has substantial physics in it. Special relativity is capable of being falsified and, from the standpoint of general relativity, it is false. All this is very hard to make sense of, or do justice to, within the confines of any version of standard empiricism, precisely because standard empiricism rejects the idea that methodological principles have physics, or metaphysics, built into themthere being, within standard empiricism, no (level 2) metamethodological framework within which rival (level 1) methodological principles can be rationally assessed. From the standpoint of aim-oriented empiricism, there is no difference in principle between an ordinary methodological rule, such as position invariance (acceptable laws and theories must be invariant with respect to change of position in space), and full Lorentz invariance. To both there correspond substantial physical or metaphysical principles, namely "space selects out no special position" or "spacetime selects out no special inertial reference frame". Both may be false, and both therefore require critical scrutiny as science develops, in accordance with aim-oriented empiricism, and not dogmatic acceptance or rejection, as required by standard empiricism, with its fixed set of methodological principles (which no one yet has been able to formulate!). Standard empiricism differentiates sharply between the status of position and Lorentz invariance-only the former qualifying as a methodological rule of physics, the latter belonging exclusively to the content of physics, as a physical theory. But this does violence to Einstein's achievement; it does violence to the new way of doing physics inspired by Einstein, which precisely exploits the fruitful interplay between new theories and new heuristic and methodological principles (along the lines stipulated by aim-oriented empiricism).

3.3 Einstein's discovery of general relativity

Aim-oriented empiricism is even more explicit in Einstein's discovery of general relativity. Einstein exploits the same method of discovery. As before, there are two fundamental conflicting theories: Newton's theory of gravitation (T 1 ) and special relativity (T 2 ). These conflict because whereas Newton's theory implies that gravitational influences travel instantaneously, special relativity implies that such influences cannot travel faster than light. As before, Einstein searches for new principles that will guide him to a new unifying theory. His first step is to notice that there is a principle implicit in Newton's theory of gravitation (P 1 ) which, if generalized (P 1 *), makes it possible to generalize and improve the principle of relativity basic to special relativity (P 2 ). This latter principle seemed unsatisfactory to Einstein because of its restriction to some arbitrarily selected set of inertial reference frames all in uniform motion with respect to each other. Much more satisfactory would be a general principle of relativity (P 2 *) which asserts that the laws of nature have the same form in all reference frames, however they may be moving or accelerating with respect to each other. But this general principle of relativity seems impossible to implement. It is one thing to say, given a train moving uniformly through a station, that there are two equivalent descriptions: (1) train moving, platform at rest; and (2) train at rest, platform moving (in the opposite direction). It is quite another to say, given that the train crashes into the buffers at the end of the station, that there are two equivalent descriptions: (1) train de-accelerates, platform remains unaccelerated; and (2) train remains unaccelerated, platform de-accelerates. These are not equivalent descriptions: in the first, it is people in the train that suffer from violent de-acceleration, whereas in the second it is people on the platform that suffer. But consider now the following remarkable feature of Newton's law of gravitation (P 1 ): in a uniform gravitational field all objects accelerate equally, whatever their mass (essentially because inertial and gravitational mass are equal). Generalize this to form the principle of equivalence (P 1 *): no local phenomenon distinguishes between (a) uniform acceleration, and (b) being at rest in a uniform gravitational field. Whatever effect a gravitational field has on some phenomenon, it is the same as the effect that the equivalent acceleration would have in the absence of gravitation. This immediately has two consequences. First, it allows us to hold that all frames, however accelerating, are equivalent, as long as, in moving from one frame to another accelerating with respect to the first, we can invoke an additional, compensating gravitational field. Thus, in the case of the crashing train we have: (1) train de-accelerates, platform remains stationary; (2) train remains stationary, platform de-accelerates, and a gravitational field exists momentarily to compensate precisely for this deacceleration. In both cases, it is the people in the train who suffer: according to the first description, because of de-acceleration; according to the second, because of the sudden gravitational field (and no compensating de-acceleration, as on the platform). The generalized principle of equivalence (P 1 *) makes it possible, in this way, to hold the generalized principle of relativity (P 2 *). The second consequence of the generalized principle of equivalence (P 1 *) is that, if correct, it enables us to discover the effects that uniform gravitational fields have on phenomena; all we need to do is to consider the effects of uniform acceleration and put these equal to the effects of the corresponding gravitational field in the absence of acceleration. The principle of equivalence (P 1 *) thus has great potential heuristic power for the discovery of the new theory of gravitation, to replace Newtonian theory.