It may be objected that physical systems that possess symmetries, which are also symmetries of the theory that determines their evolution, will evolve in accordance with a simplified version of the theory. Thus systems consisting of two spheres equal in every way rotating in a fixed circle about their centre of mass obey a simplified version of the dynamical laws of NT. This means there are regions of S where the dynamical laws are especially simple, and thus different from other regions. Does this mean the theory is correspondingly disunified? The answer is no. We need, again, to consider dynamical properties corresponding to dynamical laws. In the example just considered, if NT is true (interpreted essentialistically) then the spheres in question possess gravitational charge just like all other massive objects. It is just that, in the case of the systems possessing some rotational symmetry, the full, rich implications of the dynamical property of gravitational charge is not made manifest.

It may be objected that we may not know whether two formulations of a theory are just that, two formulations with the same physical content, or two distinct theories with distinct contents. Heisenberg's and Schrödinger's distinct formulations of quantum theory might be an example. This is correct but beside the point. The terminological problem arises when we reformulate a given theory, T, in a variety of ways, some simple and unified, some horribly complex and disunified, but we do this in such a way as to ensure quite specifically that the different formulations have precisely the same content, make precisely the same assertions about the world, this being something that we can always do. The solution to the problem proposed above is not in any way undermined by the fact that it sometimes happens that we do not know whether two formulations of a theory have the same or different contents. Nor is the distinction between form and content undermined: form has to do with what we write down on paper, content with what is being asserted. That we sometimes do not know whether difference of formulation ensures difference of content does not in the least undermine the distinction between form and content. It deserves to be noted, in addition, that one and the same formulation of a theory may be interpreted in more than one way, and thus may have different contents associated with it-a point which, again, does not undermine the theory presented here.

It may be objected that the distinction between dynamical laws which do, and do not, remain the same throughout the space S cannot be maintained. Consider the following two functions: (1) y = 3x for all x, and (2) y = 3x for x  2 and y = 4x for x > 2. It is tempting to say that (1) remains the same as x changes, but (2) does not, since what (2) asserts changes at x = 2. But given the mathematical notion of function as a rule, (2) is just as good a function as (1) and, like (1), "remains the same" as x varies. Functions corresponding to physical theories are somewhat more elaborate than this, but the above point is not affected by that consideration: it seems that the very distinction between "remains the same" and "changes" as one moves through S collapses. Clearly, in order to meet this objection, functions corresponding to physical theories need to be restricted to a narrower notion of function than the above standard mathematical one, if we are to be able to distinguish between functional relationships which do, and which do not, "remain the same" as values of variables change. We need to appeal to what may be called "invariant functions", functions which specify some fixed set of mathematical operations to be performed on "x" (or its equivalent) to obtain "y" (or its equivalent). In the example just given, (1) is invariant, butis made up of two truncated invariant functions, stuck together at x = 2. Functions that appear in theoretical physics are analytic; that is, they are repeatedly differentiable. Such functions have the remarkable property that from any small bit of the function, the whole function can be reconstructed uniquely, by a process called "analytic continuation". All analytic functions are thus invariant. The latter notion is, however, a wider one, and theoretical physics might, one day, need to employ this wider notion explicitly, if space and time turn out to be discontinuous, and analytic functions have to be abandoned at a fundamental level.

A similar remark needs to be made about Goodman's (1954) paradox concerning "grue" and "bleen". Modifying the paradox slightly, an object is grue if it is green up to time t, blue after t; it is bleen if it is blue up to time t, green after t. Sometimes it is held that there is perfect symmetry between blue and green, on the one hand, and grue and bleen on the other, especially as "emeralds are green" is equivalent to "emeralds are grue up to t, and bleen afterwards". But this symmetry is merely terminological and, as we have already seen in connection with the aberrant version of Newton's theory of gravitation, discussed in section 4.2, terminological symmetry does not mean there is symmetry of content. That there is not symmetry of content in the grue/ bleen case can be demonstrated as follows. If emeralds are grue, a person convinced of this can determine whether t is future or past merely by looking at emeralds. But if emeralds are green, a person convinced of this cannot say whether t is in the future or past by just looking at emeralds. The content, the meaning, of grue and bleen contains an implicit reference to t in a way in which that of green and blue do not. Doubtless symmetry can be created by considering two possible worlds, ours and a Goodmanesque one with special physics and/ or physiology of vision so that grue emeralds do not appear to change at t, whereas green ones do. This, however, is to consider conditions quite different from those specified by Goodman. The crucial point to make, in any case, is that dynamical or physical properties, of the kind attributed to physical entities by physical theories (interpreted in a conjecturally essentialistic way), are like blue and green, and unlike grue and bleen, in not containing any implicit reference to specific times or places (or hypersurfaces of S that distinguish one region of S from another). Physical properties must be invariant in a sense that corresponds to the invariance of allowed functions in physics. The more general notion of property, which includes Goodmanesque properties, is excluded, just as the more general notion of function, which includes (2) above as an "unchanging" function, is excluded.