

7. Specialism receives support from all those scientists and scholars keen to promote their own careers. An excellent way to ensure that one's career flourishes is to found, develop and contribute to a new discipline, a new sub-discipline or speciality. This can be done by founding, with others, a new journal devoted to the new specialized field of study; it can be done by establishing research groups devoted to the new speciality, acquiring students who seek to gain PhDs in the discipline. With others, experts in the new discipline, one can hope to win grants for research; one may even be able to create new departments or research institutions devoted to the discipline. For academic success, creating the impression of authentic scientific or scholarly activity may be more important than producing work that is of genuine intellectual value. In short, alongside authentic intellectual reasons for creating specialized fields of research, there are also merely personal, social or institutional reasons having to do with the desire, or the need, to make a success of one's career.

These, then, are some of the factors responsible for the failure to put universalism into practice-responsible for a pervasive corruption of intellectual standards.

9.7 Universalism, knowledge and wisdom

If universalism were to be put into practice we would expect intellectual inquiry as a whole to give priority to our most general and important problems-specialized problems being chosen and tackled in order to help us solve the former.

The result to be expected from putting specialism into practice is, however, the exact opposite. Although specialized, technical problems may well be tackled with brilliance and great success, from the standpoint of what matters most in life the vast industry of specialized problem solving may well seem largely irrelevant. Most specialized problem solving will be unrelated to our fundamental problems. Specialized problems will not be understood or tackled as subordinate problems to fundamental problems. Instead of illuminating our understanding of how fundamental problems may be solved, intellectual inquiry will tend to do the exact opposite. We will tend to be overwhelmed by a vast maze of specialized disciplines, jargon and results. It is not just intellectual inquiry as a whole that will suffer as a result. We will suffer.

Our capacity to think and act intelligently, in response to our basic problems, will be sabotaged. Experts will become, not our servants, but our masters.

Some years ago, in his Nobel Peace Prize lecture, Martin Luther King declared:

Modern man has brought this whole world to an awe-inspiring threshold of the future. He has reached new and astonishing peaks of scientific success. He has produced machines that think and instruments that peer into the unfathomable ranges of interstellar space. He has built gigantic bridges to span the seas and gargantuan buildings to kiss the skies. His airplanes and spaceships have dwarfed distance, placed time in chains, and carved highways through the stratosphere. This is a dazzling picture of modern man's scientific and technological progress.

Yet, in spite of these spectacular strides in science and technology, and still unlimited ones to come, something basic is missing. There is a sort of poverty of the spirit which stands in glaring contrast to our scientific and technological abundance. The richer we have become materially, the poorer we become morally and spiritually. We have learned to fly the air like birds and swim the sea like fish, but we have not learned the simple art of living together as brothers.The predominance of specialist intellectual inquiry plays its part, I suggest, in the development of the "glaring contrast" to which Martin Luther King here refers: the achievement of specialist knowledge at the expense of the achievement of wisdom.

Consider the following analogy. Our problem, let us suppose, is to build a house. On the one hand, we may tackle this problem in a critical fundamentalist manner. We propose and criticize possible solutions to our basic problem-thus developing an overall plan. In order to solve our basic problem, however, a host of specialized, technical, subordinate problems need to be solved. Bricks need to be made; so, too, slates, doors, window frames, windows, beams, plaster, floorboards, and so on. Foundations need to be dug and cemented. All the various parts need to be assembled properly, in conformity with the plan, to build the house. Plumbers need to put in pipes, tanks, sinks, a bath; electricians need to wire the house; and so on. An intricate maze of highly specialized, technical problems need to be solved by an army of experts if the house is to be built. Equally, however, if the house is to be built, it is absolutely essential that the specialized problem solving be properly coordinated so that it all gives rise to a solution to the fundamental problem-to build a house. There needs to be a constant two-way flow of information between problem solving at the fundamental level, and at the specialized level. Failure to solve certain specialized problems may necessitate a revision of the basic plan.