2.2 Karl Popper

As I mentioned in the last chapter, Popper held that science proceeds by putting forward empirically falsifiable conjectures which are then subjected to severe attempts at falsification by means of observation and experiment. Scientific theories cannot be verified by experience, but they can be falsified. Once a theory is falsified, scientists have the task of developing a potentially better theory, even more falsifiable than its predecessor, at least as ostensibly empirically successful as its predecessor, and such that it is corroborated where its predecessor was falsified. In order to be accepted (tentatively) as a part of conjectural scientific knowledge, a theory must (at least) be empirically falsifiable. Non-falsifiable, metaphysical theses are meaningful, and may influence the direction of scientific research. There can even be what Popper has called "metaphysical research programmes"-programmes of research "indispensable for science, although their character is that of metaphysical or speculative physics rather than of scientific physics  more in the nature of myths, or of dreams, than of science"For Popper, metaphysical (that is, unfalsifiable) theses cannot be a part of (conjectural) scientific knowledge; such theses cannot help determine what is accepted and rejected as (conjectural) scientific knowledge, but they can influence ideas, choice of research aims and problems, in the context of scientific discovery. (For further details see

Popper defended two distinct versions of falsificationism which, echoing terminology of Maxwell (1998), I shall call bare and dressed falsificationism. According to bare falsificationism, defended in, only empirical considerations, and such things as the falsifiability of theories and degrees of falsifiability, decide what is to be accepted and rejected in science. According to dressed falsificationism, a new theory, in order to be acceptable, "should proceed from some simple, new, and powerful, unifying idea about some connection or relation (such as gravitational attraction) between hitherto unconnected things (such as planets and apples) or facts (such as inertial and gravitational mass) or new 'theoretical entities' (such as field and particles)"This "requirement of simplicity" (as Popper calls it) is in addition to anything specified in The Logic of Scientific Discovery (L.Sc.D.). In L.Sc.D. Popper does, it is true, demand of a theory that it should be as simple as possible, but Popper there identifies degree of simplicity of a theory with degree of falsifiability. (There is a second, related notion, but Popper makes clear that if the two clash it is the falsifiability notion, just indicated, which takes priority). Thus, in L.Sc.D., in requiring of an acceptable theory that it should be as simple as possible, Popper is demanding no more than that it should be as falsifiable as possible. But Popper's "requirement of simplicity" of his Conjectures and Refutations (C.R.)is wholly in addition to falsifiability. A theory of high falsifiability may not "proceed from some simple, new, and powerful unifying idea", and vice versa. We thus have two versions of falsificationism before us: bare falsificationism of, and dressed falsificationism of C.R., with the new "requirement of simplicity" added on to the 1959 doctrine.

I now give my argument for holding that neither doctrine is tenable. (I here elaborate the criticism of Popper sketched in the previous chapter.) My argument is not that Popper fails to show how theories can be verified, or rendered probable; nor is my argument that Popper fails to show how scientific theories can be falsified, in that falsification requires the verification of a low-level falsifying hypothesis (which, according to Popper, is not possible).There is nothing "justificationist", in other words, about my criticism.It amounts simply to this. Bare falsificationism fails dramatically to do justice to the way theories are selected in science (entirely independently of any question of verification, justification or falsification). Dressed falsificationism does better justice to scientific practice, but commits science to making substantial, influential and problematic assumptions that remain implicit, and cannot adequately be made explicit within science. Science pursued in accordance with dressed falsificationism is irrational, in other words, because it fails to implement the elementary, and quasi-Popperian, requirement for rationality that "assumptions that are substantial, influential, problematic and implicit need to be made explicit, so that they can be critically assessed and so that alternatives may be put forward and considered, in the hope that such assumptions can be improved"Dressed falsificationism fails, in other words, for good Popperian reasons: it fails to expose substantial, influential, problematic assumptions to criticism within science.

2.3 Refutation of bare falsificationism

Here, then, in a little more detail, is my refutation of bare falsificationism. Given any accepted physical theory, at any stage in the development of physics, however empirically successful (however highly corroborated)-Newtonian theory, say, or classical electrodynamics, quantum theory, general relativity, quantum electrodynamics, chromodynamics or the standard model-there will always be endlessly many rival falsifiable theories that can easily be formulated which will fit the available data just as well as the accepted theory. Taking Newtonian theory (NT) as an example of an accepted theory, here are two examples of rival theories. NT*: "Everything occurs as NT asserts, until the first second of the year 2100, when an inverse cube law of gravitation will abruptly hold." NT**: "Everything occurs as NT asserts, except for systems consisting of gold spheres, each having a mass of 1,000 tons, interacting with each other gravitationally in outer space, in a vacuum, within a spherical region of 10 miles: for these systems, Newton's law of gravitation is repulsive, not attractive." (For further examples and discussion, see