In short, in order to exhibit the rationality of the diversity of method in natural science-apparent in the evolution of methods of a single science, and apparent as one moves, at a given time, from one scientific speciality to another-it is essential to adopt the meta-methodological, hierarchical standpoint of AOE, which alone enables one to depict methodological unity (high up in the hierarchy) throughout methodological diversity (low down in the hierarchy).Figure 2.1, in depicting the aims and methods of theoretical physics, depicts what is common to all of natural science (physics being the fundamental to all of natural science). In addition, the hierarchical structure of1 forms a kind of template, a paradigm, for many similarly structured but diversely interpreted depictions of aims and methods of the many diverse specialized disciplines of natural science. It is in this way that the general AOE idea can do justice both to the diverse aims and methods of different sciences at any one moment, and to the evolving aims and methods of any one science over time. At the same time, it depicts what is common to all this diversity of aims and methods: it is to be found at the metalevel, or the meta-metametalevel, and the common hierarchical structure. Furthermore, and crucially, AOE is able to provide a rationale for all this diversity of aims and methods: it does this at the metalevel, meta-methods having the role of assessing methods one step down in the hierarchy.

Falsificationism, lacking this hierarchical structure, cannot begin to do justice to this key feature of scientific method, diversity at one level, unity at another; nor can it begin to do justice to the rational need for this feature of scientific method.There is a further, important point. Any new conception of science which improves our understanding of science ought to enable us to improve scientific practice. It would be very odd if our ability to do science well were wholly divorced from our understanding of what we are doing. A test for a new theory of scientific method ought to be, then, that it improves scientific practice, and does not merely accurately depict current practice. AOE passes this test. In providing a framework for the articulation and scrutiny of level 3 metaphysical blueprints, as an integral part of science itself, and thus providing a rational means for the development of new non-empirical methods, new symmetry principles and new theories, AOE advocates, in effect, that current practice in theoretical physics be modified. AOE makes explicit what is at present only implicit. And more generally, in depicting scientific method in a hierarchical, meta-methodological fashion, AOE has implications for method throughout the natural sciences, and not just for theoretical physics.

In case it should seem miraculous that science has made progress without AOE being generally understood and accepted, I should add that good science has always put something close to AOE into practice in an implicit, somewhat covert way, and it is this which has made progress possible.

2.7 Thomas Kuhn

As I remarked in section 2.1 above, the main difference betweenpicture of science and Popper's is that, whereas Kuhn stresses that, within normal science, paradigms are dogmatically protected from refutation, from criticism, Popper holds that theories must always be subjected to severe attempted refutation. AOE is even more Popperian than Popper's falsificationism, in that AOE exposes to criticism assumptions that falsificationism denies, and thus shields from criticism. One might think, therefore, that AOE would differ even more from Kuhn's picture of science than falsificationism does.

It is therefore rather surprising that exactly the opposite is the case: in some important respects, AOE is closer to Kuhn than to Popper.

The picture of science that emerges from Kuhn (1970a) may be summarized like this. There are three stages to consider. First, there is a pre-scientific stage: the discipline is split into a number of competing schools of thought which give different answers to fundamental questions. There is debate about fundamental questions between the schools, but no overall progress, and no science.

Second, the ideas of one such school begin to meet with empirical success; these ideas become a "paradigm", and the pre-scientific school becomes normal science (competing schools withering away). Within normal science, no attempt is made to refute the paradigm (roughly, the basic theory of the science); indeed, the paradigm may be accepted even though there are well-known apparent refutations. When the paradigm fails to predict some phenomenon, it is not the paradigm, but the skill of the scientist, that is put to the test. The task of the normal scientist is to solve puzzles, rather than problems. The paradigm specifies what is to count as a solution, specifies what methods are to be employed in order to obtain the solution and guarantees that the solution exists: these are all characteristics of puzzles rather than open-ended problems. The task is gradually to extend the range of application of the paradigm to new phenomena, textbook successes being taken as models of how to proceed. Methods devolve from paradigms.