On one occasion in 1925 he expressed himself to the novelist Esther Salaman in the following terms:

I want to know how God created this world. I'm not interested in this-or-that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this-or-that element. I want to know His thoughts, the rest are details.That a basic aim of science is to unify all phenomena is affirmed in numerous passages, such as this, from 1936:

The aim of science is, on the one hand, a comprehension, as complete as possible, of the connection between the sense experiences in their totality, and, on the other hand the accomplishment of this aim by use of a minimum of primary concepts and relations. (Seeking, as far as possible, logical unity in the world picture, i.e. paucity in logical elements.) (seeEinstein also makes it clear that science at its best assumes that this goal of unification is realizable:

Certain it is that a conviction, akin to religious feeling, of the rationality or intelligibility of the world lies behind all scientific work of a higher order. This firm belief, a belief bound up with deep feeling in a superior mind that reveals itself in the world of experience, represents my conception of God. In common parlance this may be described as "pantheistic" (Spinoza).And on another occasion:

From the very beginning there has always been present the attempt to find a unifying theoretical basis for all [the] single sciences, consisting of a minimum of concepts and fundamental relationships, from which all the concepts and relationships of the single disciplines might be derived by logical process. This is what we mean by the search for a foundation of the whole of physics. The confident belief that this ultimate goal may be reached is the chief source of the passionate devotion which has always animated the researcher.As for scientific realism, Einstein expresses himself with his usual clarity and brevity:

The belief in an external world independent of the perceiving subject is the basis of all natural science. Since, however, sense perception only gives information of this external world or of "physical reality" indirectly, we can only grasp the latter by speculative means.And, on another occasion, as we have already seen:

Physics is an attempt to grasp reality as it is thought independently of its being observed.It is all summed up succinctly in a letter to Cornelius Lanczos in 1942:

You are the only person I know who has the same attitude toward physics as I have: belief in the comprehension of reality through something basically simple and unified. (All this might seem more than enough to demolish decisively the views of those, like Fine and Popper, who hold that Einstein upheld some version of standard empiricism. Unfortunately it is not. In all the above quotations, Einstein can be interpreted as asserting no more than that he, and science, seek to discover, and presuppose the existence of, a unified structure to the universe, in the context of discovery. According to this interpretation, Einstein would hold that, in the context of justification, nothing must be permanently assumed about the nature of the universe, the sole aim being empirical adequacy, empirical considerations alone in the end deciding what is to constitute theoretical scientific knowledge.

On this issue-the crucial issue which divides off standard from aim-oriented empiricism-Einstein seems to have wavered. Consider the following passage:

Can we hope to be guided safely by experience at all when there exist theories (such as classical mechanics) which to a large extent do justice to experience, without getting to the root of the matter? I answer without hesitation that there is, in my opinion, a right way, and that we are capable of finding it. Our experience hitherto justifies us in believing that nature is the realization of the simplest conceivable mathematical ideas. I am convinced that we can discover by means of purely mathematical constructions the concepts and the laws connecting them with each other, which furnish the key to the understanding of natural phenomena. Experience may suggest the appropriate mathematical concepts, but they most certainly cannot be deduced from it. Experience remains, of course, the sole criterion of the physical utility of a mathematical construction. But the creative principle resides in mathematics. In a certain sense, therefore, I hold it true that pure thought can grasp reality, as the ancients dreamed.This comes tantalizingly close to aim-oriented empiricism. A central tenet of aim-oriented empiricism is that we are rationally entitled to assume that the universe is knowable-there being some fallible, non-mechanical but rational method of discovery available to us-the knowability of the universe implying its comprehensibility. It is just this key element of aim-oriented empiricism which Einstein asserts here, his epistemological and methodological instincts as usual getting almost everything right. (The point is also brilliantly made in one of Einstein's most famous sayings: "Raffiniert ist der Herrgott, aber boshaft ist er nicht"-"God is sublime but not malicious".) Unfortunately, in the quotation given above, the italicized sentence provides Popper or Fine with the perfect excuse for interpreting the passage as a defence of standard empiricism. One can argue, of course, that the whole passage only really makes sense if interpreted as asserting: experience remains the sole criterion of physical utility granted that we restrict our attention to simple, unified theories. This would of course violate standard empiricism. But the text, as it stands, is sufficiently ambiguous to leave the matter undecided. Consider next the following passage: