Experts can be in a position to pronounce authoritatively and definitively on matters that fall within the field of their specialized knowledge. In addition, only experts can be in a position to make such authoritative pronouncements: the rest of us cannot legitimately challenge or criticize expert judgements unless we too have specialized knowledge. Scientists and scholars are thus fully justified in ignoring criticism of their work and results by "outsiders", by those without expertise. The price that the expert pays, however, in being able to make unassailable, authoritative judgements, is that he must confine himself, qua expert, to delivering judgements that lie within the limited sphere of his professional competence-that small part of his discipline about which he does have expert knowledge. He must not in his capacity as expert make pronouncements about broad political, moral, religious and philosophical issues-the immensely complex human, social problems of real life-which, in their very nature, cannot be amenable to specialized, academic treatment.

Specialism may seem to represent an intolerably narrow-minded, dogmatic, scholastic conception of intellectual inquiry. All that is adventurous, imaginative, speculative, free-ranging and creative may seem to be excluded from science and scholarship. Those who defend specialism, however, usually do so in terms of the following kind of argument. It is precisely by eschewing consideration of imaginative, speculative, imponderable issues, and instead concentrating attention on much more limited, specialized "puzzles", capable of definitive solutions, that science and scholarship have made such giant steps forward in recent times. In the end, sustained attention paid to limited, technical problems pays dividends, and may even result in a definite solution to some "profound" philosophical problem. The problem of how the human race has come into existence has been discussed fruitlessly for centuries. Not until the work of Darwin was any real contribution made towards solving this "philosophical" problem. The crucial point about Darwin's contribution, however, so the argument goes, is that it arose out of painstaking attention to highly detailed, limited, specialized problems within zoology and botany.It is, I hope, obvious from the above that according to specialism, the four basic problems of universalism lie wholly outside the field of reputable science and scholarship. Inevitably these four problems are such that there can be no general agreement as to how they ought to be formulated, or what methods ought to be adopted in seeking to solve them. It is most improbable-perhaps even undesirable-that there should ever be general agreement as to what is to count as a correct, acceptable solution to any of these problems. And it is extremely unlikely that any of them will receive a definitive solution. The four basic problems of universalism satisfy none of the requirements which specialism demands of academically reputable problems. Thus, according to specialism, discussion of these four problems has no place at all within scientific, academic inquiry. Academic inquiry may perhaps produce work that has some bearing on the answers we give to the four basic questions, as in the case of Darwin's work. This comes about, however, as a result of aiming at solutions of exclusively specialist, technical problems. The four basic problems of universalism only have a place within academic inquiry at one remove, as it were, within anthropology, sociology or the history of ideas. A historian of ideas, for example, may quite legitimately discuss the writings of those who have speculated about such problems. Such a historian will, however, be concerned to solve specialized problems within his field, concerning the evolution of ideas. He will not concern himself with the fundamental problems as such-not if he is to continue to function as an intellectually reputable academic.

Extreme versions of specialism-such as logical positivismcondemn the four basic critical fundamentalist problems as metaphysical and evaluative, and therefore strictly meaningless. Less extreme versions of specialism merely place them outside the domain of intellectually respectable scientific, academic inquiry.

9.4 Universalism, specialism and intellectual standards

Universalism and specialism uphold diametrically opposed intellectual standards.

According to universalism, it is absolutely essential for the rationality, intellectual rigour and integrity of intellectual inquiry as a whole that sustained attention be given to the four basic problems. Indeed, this attention needs to be given intellectual priority over all else. All other intellectual activity needs to be subservient to the central and fundamental activity of imaginatively proposing and critically assessing possible answers to the four basic problems. Only in this case can even the most elementary of requirements for rational problem solving be realized.

According to specialism, on the other hand, rationality, intellectual rigour and integrity actually demand that the four "basic" problems of universalism be placed outside the domain of reputable intellectual inquiry. Mature science, authentic scholarship, genuine intellectual progress only really get underway when inconclusive philosophical debate about fundamental issues has been put firmly aside.One important aspect of this difference in intellectual standards is that universalism and specialism uphold different conceptions of intellectual progress.

According to universalism, intellectual progress is to be conceived in terms of the success that intellectual inquiry has in enabling us to improve our answers to the four fundamental problems, and to improve our capacity to tackle these problems in a rational fashion. One might say that universalism, ultimately, conceives of intellectual progress in personal and social terms-in that what is at issue are in fact the answers that people give to fundamental questions in their lives. Our assessment of intellectual progress will of course depend to some extent on the kind of tentative, broad answers that we give to these questions. Intellectual progress itself is no doubt something absolute and definite; our assessment of intellectual progress, however, is bound to be somewhat tentative, it being possible for there to be a number of different legitimate assessments.