The defects of OQT have arisen, in other words, because physicists have sought to interpret probabilistic quantum theory in terms of classical waves and particles, deterministic metaphysical ideas appropriate to earlier classical physics but wholly inappropriate to the new quantum theory. The failure of this entirely misguided attempt then led to despair at the possibility of solving the (misconstrued) wave/ particle problem, despair at the possibility of specifying the precise physical nature of quantum entities. This despair in turn led to the development of OQT as a theory about the results of performing measurements-a theory which, it seemed, did not need to specify the precise nature of quantum entities. But the outcome is a theory burdened with the nine serious defects indicated above.

Thus the traditional quantum wave/ particle problem is the wrong problem to pose. We should ask, not "Are quantum entities waves or particles?", but rather, (1) what kinds of possible, unproblematic, fundamentally probabilistic physical entities are there? And (2) are quantum entities one kind of such unproblematic probabilistic entity? The failure to put right the serious defects of OQT has persisted for so long because physicists have abandoned hope of solving the traditional quantum wave/ particle problem, not realizing that this is entirely the wrong problem to try to solve in the first place. Once it is appreciated that (1) and (2) are the right problems to try to solve, new possibilities, long overlooked, immediately spring to mind. First, physical entities that interact with one another probabilistically may be dubbed propensitons. Two kinds of unproblematic propensiton can immediately be distinguished: continuous propensitons, which evolve probabilistically continuously in time, and intermittent propensitons, which evolve deterministically except for intermittent moments in time when appropriate physical conditions arise, and the propensitons undergo probabilistic transitions.

There is a second obvious distinction that can be made, between propensitons which spread out spatially in time, increasing the volume of space they occupy with the passage of time, and propensitons which do not spread spatially in this way. Let us call the first spatially spreading propensitons, and the second spatially confined propensitons.

We are in new territory. In our ordinary experience of the world, and within deterministic physics, we never encounter propensitons. Probabilistic outcomes, obtained when we toss a penny or a die, can always be put down to probabilistic changes in initial conditions. Classical statistical mechanics presupposes that the underlying dynamic laws are deterministic. Having no experience of them, propensitons will, inevitably, when we first encounter them, strike us as mysterious, even unacceptably weird. But these feelings of unfamiliarity ought not to lead us into deciding that theories which postulate such entities are inherently unacceptable. In particular, the four kinds of propensity indicated above should be regarded as equally viable, a priori. Whether a theory that postulates one or other type of propensiton is acceptable or not should be decided upon in the usual way, in terms of its empirical success, and the extent to which it is unified, simple, explanatory.

Granted that quantum systems are some kind of propensiton, which of the four kinds of unproblematic propensiton just indicated should we take quantum systems to be? There is here a very important consideration to be borne in mind. Despite suffering from the nine defects indicated above, nevertheless OQT is perhaps the most empirically successful physical theory ever formulated. The range, variety and accuracy of its empirical predictions are unprecedented. No other physical theory has been subjected to such sustained severe experimental testing, and has survived without a single refutation. There are good grounds for holding that OQT has got quite a lot right about the nature of the quantum world. Our strategy, then, ought to be, in the first instance at least, to stick as close to OQT as possible, and modify OQT just sufficiently to remove the defects of the theory. The structure of OQT mirrors that of the intermittent, spatially spreading propensiton. On the one hand, quantum states evolve deterministically, in accordance with Schrödinger's time-dependent equation; on the other hand, there are, on the face of it, probabilistic transitions associated with measurement. Quantum states spread out spatially when evolving deterministically, and tend to become localized when measurements are made. All this mirrors the character of the intermittent, spatially spreading propensiton, the only unsatisfactory feature of OQT being that the theory stipulates that probabilistic transitions occur when measurements aremade.

A very elementary kind of spatially spreading intermittent propensiton is the following. It consists of a sphere, which expands at a steady rate (deterministic evolution) until it touches a second sphere, at which moment the sphere becomes instantaneously a minute sphere, of definite radius, somewhere within the space occupied by the large sphere, probabilistically determined. The second sphere undergoes the same instantaneous probabilistic transition. Then both minute spheres again undergo steady, deterministic expansion, until they touch once more, and another probabilistic localization occurs.

A slightly more sophisticated version of this elementary spatially spreading intermittent propensiton is the following. The sphere is made up of variable "position probability density", such that, when the sphere localizes probabilistically, in the way just indicated, it is most probable that it will be localized where the position probability density is most dense. AA law specifies how position probability density is distributed throughout the sphere. We might even imagine that the position probability density exhibits a wave-like distribution. Such a propensiton, given appropriate conditions for probabilistic localization, might even exhibit interference phenomena in a two-slit experiment! Quantum entities, such as electrons, photons and atoms, are, IIsuggest, spatially spreading intermittent propensitons. Their physical state is specified by the  function of QT. The deterministic evolution of these quantum propensitons is specified by Schrödinger's time-dependent equation: