to the conclusion, from a consideration of archaeological evidence, that early hunting and gathering tribes "enjoyed relatively high standards of comfort and security", having more leisure than later agricultural tribes.) Thus, it is not closeness to Nature, but the exact opposite, departure from day-to-day dependency on Nature, the development of agricultural technology, which creates rigidity, taboo and ritual. In any case, the Pygmies decisively refute Popper's contention that tribal life is invariably rigid, ritualistic and irrational. In many ways, in fact, our modern "open" societies in the industrially advanced West are closer, at the institutional level, to the Bantu reliance on rigidly maintained ritual and taboo, than to the Pygmy reliance on spontaneous instinct and skill. And-of particular relevance to the theme of this chapter-this is perhaps especially true of modern specialized scientific, academic research. Rigidly maintained taboo and ritual, broken only by "comparatively infrequent changes" having "the character of religious conversions or convulsions"-this corresponds almost exactly to specialist scientific research as described and documented by. Even the vocabulary is the same. Kuhn describes scientific revolutions as infrequent episodes of crisis, inducing intense anxiety while they last, the process of acquiring the new paradigm constituting a kind of irrational religious conversion. At present one perhaps needs the serene self-assurance and lucidity of an Einstein (acquired as a result of sustained, instinctive fundamentalist thought) to recapture the spontaneity and trust of the Pygmy way of life in the modern scientific world. It is clear that in Einstein's case scientific curiosity arose spontaneously from the heart in response to a feeling of "rapturous amazement at the harmony of natural law". (In a letter to Gertrud Warschauer in 1952, Einstein wrote: "You have given me great joy with the little book about Faraday. This man loved mysterious Nature as a lover loves his distant beloved. In his day there did not yet exist the dull specialization that stares with self-conceit through hornrimmed glasses and destroys poetry"). And Einstein found no difficulty in conceiving himself as a part of Nature. When asked to respond to the question "If, on your death bed, you looked back on your life, by what facts would you determine whether it was a success or failure?", Einstein replied: "Neither on my death bed nor before will I ask myself such a question. Nature is not an engineer or contractor, and I myself am a part of Nature", p. 92). 13. The destructive impact of industrially more advanced ways of life on primitive or so-called primitive ways of life has been, and is at present, all too often, blatant and brutal. But it can also be subtle and unintended. For a perceptive account of this in connection with the importation of Western economic ideas and practices, see. 14. Einstein was always aware of the instinctively fundamentalist character of childish thinkingas well as of the childish origins of mature fundamentalist thought-associated, for him, essentially with curiosity provoked by a sense of wonder, together with scepticism concerning the received dogmas of the adult world. In explanation of his own fundamentalist thinking concerning the structure of the physical universe, he once remarked that ordinarily only children take such problems seriously. He, however-a late developer-continued to pursue such elementary questions; and, as an adult, naturally, was better equipped to come up with improved answers. On another occasion he remarked: "There exists a passion for comprehension, just as there exists a passion for music. That passion is rather common in children, but gets lost in most people later on. Without this passion, there would be neither mathematics nor natural science". And in connection with his own education, in a well-known passage, he remarks:

In this field … [of physics] I soon learned to scent out that which was able to lead to fundamentals and to turn aside from everything else, from the multitude of things which clutter up the mind and divert it from the essential. The hitch in this was, of course, the fact that one had to cram all this stuff into one's mind for the examinations, whether one liked it or not. This coercion had such a deterring effect [upon me] that, after I had passed the final examination, I found the consideration of any scientific problems distasteful to me for an entire year. In justice I must add, moreover, that in Switzerland we had to suffer far less under such coercion, which smothers every truly scientific impulse, than is the case in many another locality. There were altogether only two examinations; aside from these, one could just about do as one pleased. This was especially the case if one had a friend, as did I, who attended the lectures regularly and who worked over their content conscientiously. This gave one freedom in the choice of pursuits until a few months before the examination, a freedom which I enjoyed to a great extent having gladly taken into the bargain the bad conscience connected with it as by far the lesser evil. It is, in fact, nothing short of a miracle that the modern methods of instruction have not yet entirely strangled the holy curiosity of inquiry; for this delicate little plant, aside from stimulation, stands mainly in need of freedom; without this it goes to wrack and ruin without fail. It is a very grave mistake to think that the enjoyment of seeing and searching can be promoted by means of coercion and a sense of duty. (Einstein, "Autobiographical Notes", in Schilpp, 1969, p. 17).