Such possibilities are excluded by the search for knowledge as characterized by Braithwaite and Mellor; this means these possibilities are just dogmatically assumed to be false. But the Braithwaite-Mellor approach is also not narrow enough, because, as I have indicated above, if science is to be possible, ad hoc regularities must be persistently excluded from consideration. And, as we have seen, there is no sharp distinction between the ad hoc and the non-ad hoc. In Chapter 4 I listed eight kinds of disunity-in effect, eight different ways in which regularities might be ad hoc, which range from the severely ad hoc (distinct regularities in different space-time regions) to the scarcely ad hoc at all (space-time and matter not being unified). What does the policy of "inductive projection") amount to? Does it involve merely excluding permanently all theories that are type (1) ad hoc (distinct regularities in different space-time regions)? Again, this is both too narrow, and not narrow enough. Exactly the same objection arises wherever the line is drawn, between regularities that are too ad hoc to be considered by science, and those that are sufficiently non-ad hoc to be open to scientific consideration. We cannot, at this point, simply invoke the aesthetic induction, and declare that we discover, by induction, where the line is to be drawn between the acceptably and unacceptably ad hoc, because, as McAllister himself has so clearly shown, for logical reasons, the aesthetic induction can only proceed once methods have been arrived at by aim-analysis

Another approach might be to favour permanently in science theories that are as non-ad hoc as possible, in all eight senses, but not to draw a rigid line between the acceptably and unacceptably ad hoc. This would allow something like the aesthetic induction to proceed in science (although not in quite the open-ended way in which McAllister envisages). But even this attempt at solving the problem is both too narrow and not narrow enough. Endlessly many universes are possible in which we may live and acquire knowledge, and yet this inductive policy would not be appropriate for acquiring knowledge. It biases the search for knowledge in the direction of physicalism. But physicalism may be false; the universe may be comprehensible in some other way, or not comprehensible at all.

My claim is that the best possible way in which we can go about seeking knowledge is to do so employing the hierarchical aims-and-methods structure of (generalized) AOE. We must make some kind of guess as to what kind of universe we are in, in order to proceed at all. At the top of the hierarchy we need to put those relatively contentless guesses which are such that their truth is required for acquisition of knowledge to be possible at all. These are justifiably permanent items of scientific knowledge. As we descend the hierarchy, we need to put increasingly contentful guesses, chosen because these seem to be the most fruitful from the standpoint of engendering methods that seem to offer the best help with acquiring empirical knowledge. As we proceed, we revise these guesses in the light of the relative empirical success and failure of rival research programmes, based on rival low-level metaphysical guesses. We try to keep such revisions as low as possible in the hierarchy when we seem to be achieving overall success, and only allow revisions to ascend higher up in the hierarchy when success is not being achieved, and higher-level revisions seem to be required.

This hierarchical conception of scientific method enables science to respond sensitively to what it seems to discover about the nature of the universe, lower-level aims and methods being adjusted in the light of apparent empirical success and failure, and within a framework of fixed, relatively unproblematic, higher-level aims and methods. All attempts at justifying induction pragmatically that are known to me, along lines advocated by Braithwaite and Mellor, fail because they fail to take note of the resources of (generalized) AOE. They all attempt to justify methods that are demonstrably not as efficient as those of AOE in enabling us to acquire knowledge of nature. They fail to encapsulate the responsiveness, the flexibility, the open-endedness and precision, of AOE.

And this is true of MAI as well. Indeed, as we saw in section 6.4 above, the aesthetic induction has conservatism built into it, and cannot help engender revolutionary new ideas for revolutionary new theories, whereas AOE is designed to do just that. It embodies a rational, if fallible, method of discovery for theoretical physics.

Popper's words might, however, be uttered by me with far greater justice. For I really have solved the problem of induction. The solution has been extraordinarily fruitful, and has enabled me to solve a number of other philosophical problems.But few philosophers-if any-would agree that I have solved the problem. Few, indeed, have taken the trouble to study, or criticize, my work, or are even aware that I have done some work on the problem.I think I know why this is the case. First, it is no doubt the fate of most of us seeking to contribute to philosophy: our work sinks without trace, without comment. Second, the problem of induction has been around for a very long time; anyone claiming to solve the problem is almost bound to be wrong. Third, there is a kind of "negative judgement through persistent neglect" effect. The first version of my proposed solution was published over forty years ago in 1974: if there was anything in it, surely someone would have noticed and taken up the idea by now. Fourth, as Popper points out elsewhere (1963, ch. 2), "analytic" philosophy has tended to be more interested in analysis of concepts than in proposed solutions to fundamental philosophical problems. Fifth, my solution amounts to a radical improvement of Popper's attempted solution. Popper was hostile to this, and Popperians today are hostile to it, precisely because I have the temerity to claim that I have radically improved Popper's ideas. Anti-Popperians are indifferent because they know Popper has failed to solve the problem, and they assume my approach inherits Popper's failure. Finally, and perhaps most damagingly, my proposed solution involves recognizing that science makes a persistent metaphysical assumption of "uniformity" or "unity". Philosophers at once know that any attempt to solve the problem of induction along these lines is hopeless. As Bas van Fraassen once put it: "From Gravesande's axiom of the uniformity of nature in 1717 to Russell's postulates of human knowledge in 1948, this has been a mug's game"