Second, Popper emphasizes that a theory is only falsifiable with respect to the adoption of a methodology. Given that a theory is empirically falsified, it is always possible to rescue the theory from falsification by adopting what Popper calls "conventionalist stratagems". These include explaining the experimental result away in some way, or modifying the theory, in an ad hoc way, so that it no longer clashes with the empirical result. Popper proposes that science should adopt methodological rules governing the way theories are to be accepted and rejected in science in the light of evidence: these rules need to be designed to expose theories to the maximum risk of empirical refutation. Conventionalist stratagems, in particular, are to be banned. Faced by a refutation, a theory may be modified so as to overcome the refutation, but only if the modification increases the empirical content, the degree of falsifiability, of the theory-the modified theory predicting more, excluding more potentially falsifying observational statements, than before. Scientists should always strive to put forward theories that say as much as possible about the empirical world, that expose themselves to the greatest risk of refutation, that have the highest possible degree of falsifiability. The supreme methodological principle of science, for Popper, "says that the other rules of scientific procedure must be designed in such a way that they do not protect any statement in science against falsification"

Even though theories cannot be verified, they can be "corroborated". For Popper, corroboration is a measure of how well a theory has stood up to attempts to refute it. If a highly falsifiable theory has survived an onslaught of severe testing, then it has proved its worth. It deserves to be taken more seriously than an untested theory, or an unfalsifiable speculation.

According to Popper, then, science makes progress by means of wild imagining, bold guesswork, on the one hand, controlled by ferocious attempted empirical refutation on the other hand.

L.Sc.D. was influenced by the thought of the Vienna Circle, but also differs from, and is highly critical of, some of the main tenets of the Circle. Logical positivism sought to demarcate the meaningful from the meaningless, with only those propositions capable of being verified being meaningful, the hope being that all meaningful factual propositions would be scientific. Popper stressed that any such criterion would condemn scientific theories to being meaningless, since they could not be verified. Popper's demarcation problem differed from that of the positivists. For Popper, as we have seen, the problem was to demarcate science from non-science (pseudoscience and metaphysics); falsifiability, not verifiability, is the key requirement; but non-scientific, metaphysical theories, though neither verifiable nor falsifiable, may nevertheless be entirely meaningful, and may even have a fruitful role to play in the development of science. Metaphysical theses, such as atomism, may suggest, and may (as a result of acquiring precision) be transformed into, falsifiable scientific theories.

1.4 Criticism

Does L.Sc.D. succeed in solving its two basic problems? Three great merits of the book are its originality, its clarity and its tight structure: everything devolves from the key idea of falsifiability. This makes the book especially open to criticism, and to improvement. In the end, the book fails to solve its basic problems, due to its treatment of simplicity.

Popper claims that the more falsifiable a theory is, so the greater its degree of simplicity. (There is a second method for assessing degrees of simplicity, in terms of number of observation statements required to falsify the theories in question, but Popper stresses that if the two methods clash, it is the first that takes precedence.) It is easy to see that Popper's proposal fails. Given a reasonably simple scientific theory, T, one can readily increase the falsifiability of T by adding on an independently testable hypotheses, h 1 , to form the new theory, T + h 1. This new theory will be more falsifiable than T but, in general, will be drastically less simple. And one can make the situation even worse, by adding on as many independently testable hypotheses as one pleases, h 2 , h 3 and so on, to form new theories, T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 + , as highly empirically falsifiable and as drastically lacking in simplicity as one pleases. Thus simplicity cannot be equated with falsifiability.

And there is a further, even more devastating point. Popper's methodological rules favour T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 over T, especially if h 1 , h 2 and h 3 have been severely tested and corroborated. But in scientific practice, T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 would never even be considered, however highly corroborated it might be if considered, because of its extreme lack of simplicity or unity, its grossly ad hoc character. There is here a fundamental flaw in the central doctrine of L., Popper put forward a new methodological principle which, when added to those of L.Sc.D., succeeds in excluding theories such as T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 from scientific consideration. According to Popper, a new theory, in order to be acceptable, "should proceed from some simple, new, and powerful, unifying idea about some connection or relation (such as gravitational attraction) between hitherto unconnected things (such as planets and apples) or facts (such as inertial and gravitational mass) or new 'theoretical entities' (such as field and particles)" (p. 241). T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 does not "proceed from some simple, new and powerful, unifying idea" and is to be rejected on that account, even if more highly corroborated than T.