

So much for my preliminary exposition of universalism. I turn now to a consideration of the rival doctrine of specialism.

9.3 Specialism

For most scientists, scholars and educationalists today, specialism is a much more familiar doctrine than universalism: my exposition of specialism can therefore be much briefer. Specialism, unlike universalism, is almost exclusively a view of professional, expert, scientific, academic inquiry-even though this view, being embodied in so much presentday scientific, academic practice, has far-reaching consequences for all our personal, social lives. In complete contrast to universalism, specialism insists that only the specialized, technical problems of the various academic disciplines deserve serious intellectual attention. In order to be capable of serious scientific or scholarly treatment, in other words, a problem must satisfy certain conditions. It must be capable of being given an agreed, precise formulation. The problem must have an objective character, in that experts agree as to how the problem is to be formulated. The nature of the problem must not depend on such subjective, personal or idiosyncratic matters as mood, feelings, personal desires, attitudes or convictions. There must exist agreed procedures for tackling the problem. Above all, there must be general agreement as to what counts as the solution. It must be possible for the problem to receive a definitive solution. Academically respectable problems must, in short, have many of the characteristics of puzzles-chess or crossword puzzles, for example-as emphasized by Kuhn in connection with what he has called "normal" science). Such problems arise quite essentially within the context of specialized disciplines, where there are agreed methods, results, assumptions and procedures. It is precisely by excluding all that is vague, ambiguous, controversial, metaphysical or philosophical that such academically respectable problems can be formulated or created. In order to be in a position to understand, solve and assess proposed solutions to such problems, one needs to be an expert, with specialized knowledge of the relevant discipline, its methods and results. It is not in general necessary to have broad intellectual or cultural sympathies and understanding. By and large, ignorance of social, political, religious, moral and philosophical issues lying beyond the scope of his discipline does not in any way hamper or disqualify the expert in his professional work. A "mere" expert or specialist can be as well equipped as anyone to make outstanding contributions to his discipline.

Experts can be in a position to pronounce authoritatively and definitively on matters that fall within the field of their specialized knowledge. In addition, only experts can be in a position to make such authoritative pronouncements: the rest of us cannot legitimately challenge or criticize expert judgements unless we too have specialized knowledge. Scientists and scholars are thus fully justified in ignoring criticism of their work and results by "outsiders", by those without expertise. The price that the expert pays, however, in being able to make unassailable, authoritative judgements, is that he must confine himself, qua expert, to delivering judgements that lie within the limited sphere of his professional competence-that small part of his discipline about which he does have expert knowledge. He must not in his capacity as expert make pronouncements about broad political, moral, religious and philosophical issues-the immensely complex human, social problems of real life-which, in their very nature, cannot be amenable to specialized, academic treatment.

Specialism may seem to represent an intolerably narrow-minded, dogmatic, scholastic conception of intellectual inquiry. All that is adventurous, imaginative, speculative, free-ranging and creative may seem to be excluded from science and scholarship. Those who defend specialism, however, usually do so in terms of the following kind of argument. It is precisely by eschewing consideration of imaginative, speculative, imponderable issues, and instead concentrating attention on much more limited, specialized "puzzles", capable of definitive solutions, that science and scholarship have made such giant steps forward in recent times. In the end, sustained attention paid to limited, technical problems pays dividends, and may even result in a definite solution to some "profound" philosophical problem. The problem of how the human race has come into existence has been discussed fruitlessly for centuries. Not until the work of Darwin was any real contribution made towards solving this "philosophical" problem. The crucial point about Darwin's contribution, however, so the argument goes, is that it arose out of painstaking attention to highly detailed, limited, specialized problems within zoology and botany.It is, I hope, obvious from the above that according to specialism, the four basic problems of universalism lie wholly outside the field of reputable science and scholarship. Inevitably these four problems are such that there can be no general agreement as to how they ought to be formulated, or what methods ought to be adopted in seeking to solve them. It is most improbable-perhaps even undesirable-that there should ever be general agreement as to what is to count as a correct, acceptable solution to any of these problems. And it is extremely unlikely that any of them will receive a definitive solution. The four basic problems of universalism satisfy none of the requirements which specialism demands of academically reputable problems. Thus, according to specialism, discussion of these four problems has no place at all within scientific, academic inquiry. Academic inquiry may perhaps produce work that has some bearing on the answers we give to the four basic questions, as in the case of Darwin's work. This comes about, however, as a result of aiming at solutions of exclusively specialist, technical problems. The four basic problems of universalism only have a place within academic inquiry at one remove, as it were, within anthropology, sociology or the history of ideas. A historian of ideas, for example, may quite legitimately discuss the writings of those who have speculated about such problems. Such a historian will, however, be concerned to solve specialized problems within his field, concerning the evolution of ideas. He will not concern himself with the fundamental problems as such-not if he is to continue to function as an intellectually reputable academic.