

We cannot hope to provide an argument that establishes that the unified metaphysical conjecture of physics is true, or probably true. Any such argument that ignores experience and is entirely a priori is surely entirely impossible. What could the premises of such an argument be? On the other hand, any such argument that appeals to experience, to empirical science, also seems impossible. Any attempt to establish the truth of the metaphysical conjecture of lawful unity by an appeal to the success of science can always be rebutted by the counter-claim that the aberrant version of the metaphysical conjecture (which postulates radical change in 2090) would receive just as much support from an empirically equally successful aberrant science.

There does not seem to be much hope either for a Kantian argument along the lines that experience cannot refute order in the universe because experience, in order to be conscious, must exhibit some order. We can easily imagine a universe that is sufficiently orderly for conscious experience, and life, to be possible, but in which only disunified, aberrant laws, of one kind or another, hold. Arguments along Kantian lines do not provide grounds for accepting a metaphysical conjecture sufficiently contentful to exclude empirically successful aberrant physical theories.

One possibility is to argue that it is rational to accept a metaphysical conjecture which is such that the truth of the conjecture is required for the pursuit of knowledge to be possible at all. Even though there would be no argument for the truth of the thesis, there would be an argument for accepting the thesis as a part of knowledge since, if the thesis is false, we cannot acquire knowledge whatever we assume. Accepting the thesis as a part of scientific knowledge cannot imperil or adversely affect science whatever the universe is like.

The problem with this argument is that it does not provide grounds for accepting a metaphysical conjecture that has sufficient content to exclude empirically successful aberrant physical theories of the kind that physics does, in practice, exclude (or just ignore). We can easily imagine a universe which is such that there is no underlying unity of physical law, and yet human life is possible, and new knowledge can be acquired.

A rather more Popperian argument would be that we should accept that metaphysical conjecture which holds out the greatest promise of scientific progress. But any such argument faces the difficulty that there will always be equally valid arguments for aberrant metaphysical conjectures that promise success for aberrant science (science with a succession of empirically successful aberrant theories).

In attempting to justify acceptance of a metaphysical conjecture of science, there are four considerations that we may appeal to, three of which are wholly Popperian in spirit if not in the letter of Popperian doctrine:

(1) If some metaphysical thesis, M, is implicit in some scientific methodological practice, then science is more rigorous if M is made explicit, since this facilitates criticism of it, the consideration of alternatives. (2) A metaphysical thesis may be such that its truth is a necessary condition for it to be possible for us to acquire knowledge: if so, accepting the thesis can only help, and cannot undermine, the pursuit of knowledge of truth. (3) Given two rival metaphysical theses, M 1 and M 2 , it may be the case that M 1 supports an empirical scientific research programme that has apparently met with far greater empirical success than any rival empirical research programme based on M 2 : in this case we may favour M 1 over M 2 , at least until M 2 , or some third thesis, M 3 , shows signs of supporting an even more empirically progressive research programme. 14 (4) M 1 may be preferred to M 2 on the grounds that it gives greater promise of supporting an empirically progressive research programme.

The above discussion has revealed that these four considerations fail to provide a justification for accepting the metaphysical thesis of physics.

To sum up. Intellectual rigour requires that physics acknowledges that there is a substantial metaphysical thesis implicit in its persistent acceptance of unified theories even though endlessly many empirically more successful disunified rivals are always potentially available. Two problems arise, however, once this metaphysical thesis of physics is acknowledged. What should we take this metaphysical thesis to assert? And what grounds are there for accepting it as a part of scientific knowledge? So far, no satisfactory solution to these two problems has been forthcoming.

These two problems can be solved, however, if physics is construed as adopting, not just one metaphysical conjecture, but a hierarchy of such conjectures concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe, these conjectures becoming more and more insubstantial as one ascends the hierarchy, more and more likely to be true (see

.1). We need, in short, to adopt the hierarchical view sketched in section 2.1. This hierarchical view of aim-oriented empiricism (AOE) is a radical improvement over Popper's falsificationism. In this section I expound AOE (in a little more detail than the introductory exposition of section 2.1) and indicate how it solves the two problems just mentioned; I indicate further how it solves the methodological problem of induction and the related problem of simplicity, and then consider possible objections.