Specialists can claim to reach their results by employing such an oracular conception of reason (which includes, of course, appeals to evidence), and on that basis, can claim full authoritative status for their pronouncements, immune to the sceptical doubts of the ignorant. Of course, even specialists should not think that the results of their specialist research is immune, in an a priori way as it were, from non-specialist criticism. Oracular conceptions of reason (of method), which claim to bequeath indubitability to results obtained by their means, need to be rejected in all fields, including specialized fields of research (even mathematics, where the boldest claims for certainty are made). It is, of course, crucial that such oracular conceptions of reason are rejected when it comes to universalism-otherwise we would have the appalling prospect of professors deciding authoritatively for the rest of us how we should live, what is of value in life, what our life problems are and how they are to be resolved. This is Plato's vision of the dictatorship of the philosopher-king.

Even if we do identify reason with some set of rules, laws, methods or criteria which, in some restricted field perhaps, dictate decisions to us, we ought always to be aware that it is our own decision to adopt these laws, methods, etc. Genuine rationality involves being able to choose and develop such laws to suit our purposes. Universalism is correct in insisting that genuine rationality involves recognizing that ultimately we choose and decide. And choose and decide fallibly.

4. According to specialism, the expert is entirely entitled to pronounce authoritatively on matters relating to his discipline, in a manner which ignores the contributions, the criticisms, of non-experts. This is because, according to specialism, only specialized considerations can be relevant for an assessment of specialized results. Only the expert can be competent to contribute to a specialized discipline. There can be no doubt that being able to pronounce authoritatively in this kind of way is something that is deeply appealing to many. Universalism, however, deprives the expert of this deeply appealing authoritative immunity from outside criticism. Basic assumptions about the nature of the world, and about the meaning and value of life, must inevitably, according to universalism, pervade specialist work. It cannot be correct for experts to decide for the rest of us what these assumptions should be. It is thus entirely proper that non-experts should be able to challenge and contribute to critical fundamentalist assumptions implicit in specialized work. It is indeed important that experts do listen to non-expert comments and criticisms concerning fundamental assumptions, since it is all too easy for the expert to forget the prevalence and influence of such assumptions amidst his technical work-losing sight of the wood for the trees.

There is, of course, a very serious problem here, which confronts academic inquiry pursued along the lines of universalism. It is the problem of distinguishing between honest, potentially significant and fruitful criticism of academic work, and criticism that is dishonest, dogmatic, pathologically ignorant, merely destructive, and even possibly in the pay of corporations and other interests out to discredit authentic results, as when special interests seek to cast doubt on the reality of human-induced climate change to protect profits from oil and coal. Legitimate, authentic non-specialist comment and criticism must be distinguished from illegitimate, inauthentic comment and criticism. And academia must discover how to maintain this all-important and highly problematic distinction, in order to preserve and enhance the intellectual integrity of academic thought.

5. Increasingly, during the last fifty to one hundred years, scientific, academic work has become something that is engaged in as a profession, a career, rather than out of amateur love. The scientific, academic enterprise has become increasingly institutional and bureaucratic in character. All this favours, and almost requires, specialism. For these factors require that scientific, academic work can be assessed in a definite, agreed way, sound work being distinguishable from unsound work in an uncontroversial manner. Promotions, funding of research work, professional status, management of research-these career and institutional matters all favour the adoption of definite, agreed specialist intellectual standards. Sustained inquiry into fundamental problems is much more difficult to professionalize and institutionalize. Crucial institutional questions such as whose work is to receive funds, to be taught, to be rewarded with promotion and academic honours, become almost impossible to decide in a standard, bureaucratic manner.6. Once a conception of intellectual inquiry has become establishedbuilt into the institutional and bureaucratic structure of intellectual inquiry-all sorts of mechanisms tend to preserve this institutionalized conception. Education will tend to indoctrinate pupils and students in this conception. Only those who conform to the standards of the conception will be able to do research work, publish, obtain academic jobs. Only that work which conforms to the accepted standards will be published, and will be accepted on publication. Even those who disagree with the institutionalized viewpoint will be obliged to pay lip service to it, simply in order to teach, publish and do research. As a result, the public face of scientific, academic inquiry will come overwhelmingly to conform to the general viewpoint, and it will seem increasingly absurd to call this viewpoint into question. Once specialism is established institutionally, in short, no problem arises as to why this viewpoint should persist.