The notion of "research programme" appealed to here is similar to, but not the same as, the notion developed byThe main differences are as follows. For Lakatos, the "hard core" of a research programme was a testable theory rendered metaphysical by a methodological decision; the main research activity associated with a research programme involved developing successful applications of the theory, guided by the "positive heuristic" stemming from the "hard core". (In all this, Lakatos followed Kuhn's conception of "normal science", giving Lakatosian terms to Kuhnian ideas [see) In the text, I have assumed that the metaphysics of a research programme is authentic, inherently untestable metaphysics, the main research task being to develop a succession of theories that progressively capture the metaphysics more and more successfully. The account of "degrees of disunity" given in section 5.3 above provides a precise way of assessing the extent to which successive "totalities of fundamental physical theory" do, or do not, increasingly successfully capture physicalism. Thus, given such a succession, T 1 , T 2 ,  T m , with degrees of disunity N 1 , N 2 ,  N m , of type (5-7), with N 1 > N 2 >  > N m , then T 1 , T 2 ,  T m do progressively capture physicalism(5-7) more and more successfully. There is nothing like this in the Lakatosian account of research programme, lacking as it does the solution to the problem of unity of theory. Finally, there is a substantial difference in the intended application of the two notions. Whereas I see science as a whole as one gigantic research programme, the hierarchy of versions of physicalism being presupposed as the metaphysical "hard core", it is essential to Lakatos's quasi-Popperian conception of science that science is made up of competing research programmes. This means that, for Lakatos, science cannot be viewed as one gigantic Lakatosian research programme (since, if it were, there could be no competitor). Lakatos does say, it is true, "Even science as a whole can be regarded as a huge research programme with Popper's supreme heuristic rule: 'devise conjectures which have more empirical content than their predecessors' "But there is here no overall Lakatosian "hard core" or "positive heuristic". This is Popper's conception of science and, for Lakatos, his own conception of research programme is strictly inapplicable to science as a whole. (For a more detailed comparison and critical assessment of the two views, see Chapter 2, section 2.8).Some philosophers of science hold that the successive revolutions in theoretical physics that have taken place since Galileo or Newton make it quite impossible to construe science as steadily and progressively honing in on some definite view of the natural worldIf attention is restricted to standard empiricism and physical theory, this may be the case. But the moment some form of presuppositionism is accepted, and one considers metaphysical theses implicit in the methods of science, a very different conclusion emerges: all theoretical revolutions since Galileo exemplify the one idea of unity in nature. Far from obliterating the idea that there is a persistent thesis about the nature of the universe in physics, as Kuhn and Laudan suppose, all theoretical revolutions, without exception, do exactly the opposite in revealing that theoretical physics draws ever closer to capturing the idea that there is an underlying dynamic unity in nature, as specified by physicalism

There is a further point to be made in favour of physicalism(8). So far, every theoretical advance in physics has revealed that theories accepted earlier are false. Thus Galileo's laws of terrestrial motion and Kepler's laws of planetary motion are contradicted by Newtonian theory, in turn contradicted by special relativity, in turn contradicted by general relativity. The whole of classical physics is contradicted by quantum theory, in turn contradicted by quantum field theory. Science advances from one false theory to another. Viewed from a standard empiricist perspective, this seems discouraging, and has prompted the view that all future theories will be false as well, a view that has been called "the pessimistic induction"Viewed from the perspective of science presupposing physicalism(8), however, this mode of advance is wholly encouraging, since it is required if physicalism(8) is true. Granted physicalism(8), the only way a dynamical theory can be precisely true of any restricted range of phenomena is if it is such as to be straightforwardly generalizable so as to be true of all phenomena. Any physical theory inherently restricted to a limited range of phenomena, even though containing a wealth of true approximate predictions about these phenomena, must nevertheless be strictly false: only a theory of everything can be a candidate for truth! Not only does the way physics has advanced from one false theory to the next accord with physicalism(8); the conception of unity sketched in section 5.3 successfully accounts for another feature of the way theoretical physics has advanced. Let T 1 , T 2 ,  T n stand for successive stages in the totality of fundamental theory in physics. Each of T 1 , T 2 ,  T n contradicts physicalism