

This wholesale, structural irrationality of academic inquiry as it mostly exists today is no mere formal matter. It has far-flung, long-term damaging consequences. It means that knowledge and technological know-how are pursued dissociated intellectually from a more fundamental concern to promote increasingly cooperatively rational tackling of conflicts and problems of living. As I have pointed out (in section 10.2), it is this that is at the root of most of our current global problems.

A kind of inquiry that pursues knowledge and technological knowhow, and fails to give intellectual priority to the tasks of articulating our problems of living, and proposing and criticizing possible solutions (thus violating three of the four most elementary rules of reason conceivable), must inevitably tend to create the kind of global problems we face today, the outcome of possessing much recently acquired power to act, without the power to act wisely. And the more successful such "knowledgeinquiry" is, so the greater the human suffering it is likely to lead to.

Reason is far too important "for everything we cherish" for it to be tolerable that it should be systematically violated in this way.

Here, then, is a major failing of Popper's version of the Enlightenment Programme. Instead of arguing for the need to reject knowledge-inquiry and replace it with the kind of academic inquiry indicated above, "wisdom-inquiry" as it may be called, Popper defends knowledge-inquiry, and even defends pro-naturalist social science.10.5 The New Enlightenment, step (i): from falsificationism to aim-oriented empiricism I come now to a rather more radical revision of Popper's version of the Enlightenment Programme. This begins with a revision of step (i) of the programme. Popper's falsificationism is untenable, and needs to be replaced by a conception of scientific method that I have called aimoriented empiricism (AOE). The reason for this revision, already discussed in Chapters 2, 5 and 7, can be summarized as follows. Science only considers (and only accepts) theories that are sufficiently simple, unified or explanatory, and this means that the methods of science make a persistent metaphysical assumption about the universe, to the effect that it has a simple, unified, explanatory dynamic structure. That such a persistent metaphysical assumption is made by science, as a part of (conjectural) scientific knowledge, contradicts, and refutes, falsificationism. An improved conception of scientific method is required.

In The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1959), Popper claims that the more falsifiable a theory is, so the greater its degree of simplicity. (There is a second method for assessing degrees of simplicity, in terms of number of observation statements required to falsify the theories in question, but Popper stresses that if the two methods clash, it is the first that takes precedence.) It is easy to see that Popper's proposal fails. Given a reasonably simple scientific theory, T, one can readily increase the falsifiability of T by adding on an independently testable hypotheses, h 1 , to form the new theory, T + h 1. This new theory will be more falsifiable than T but, in general, will be drastically less simple. And one can make the situation even worse, by adding on as many independently testable hypotheses as one pleases, h 2 , h 3 and so on, to form new theories T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 + …, as highly empirically falsifiable and as drastically lacking in simplicity as one pleases.Thus simplicity cannot be equated with falsifiability.

And there is a further, even more devastating point. Popper's methodological rules favour T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 over T, especially if h 1 , h 2 and h 3 have been severely tested, and corroborated. But in scientific practice, T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 would never even be considered, however highly corroborated it might be if considered, because of its extreme lack of simplicity or unity, its grossly ad hoc character. There is here a fundamental flaw in the central doctrine of The Logic of Scientific Discovery., Popper put forward a new methodological principle which, when added to those of the earlier book, succeeds in excluding theories such as T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 from scientific consideration. This principle states that a new theory, in order to be acceptable, "should proceed from some simple, new, and powerful, unifying idea about some connection or relation (such as gravitational attraction) between hitherto unconnected things (such as planets and apples) or facts (such as inertial and gravitational mass) or new "theoretical entities" (such as field and particles)". T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 does not "proceed from some simple, new and powerful, unifying idea", and is to be rejected on that account, even if more highly corroborated than T.