In 1970 there appeared Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, edited by Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave, the fourth volume of the proceedings of a conference on philosophy of science held in London in 1968. This volume is devoted to a comparison of the views of Thomas Kuhn and Popper on the philosophy of science, and contains contributions from Kuhn, Popper, Watkins, Toulmin, Lakatos, Feyerabend and others. In his contribution Popper praises Kuhn for having discovered normal science, science which takes some "paradigm" for granted and devotes itself to puzzle solving. Popper points out that he had himself made the same discovery over thirty years earlier, as recorded in the preface to L.Sc.D. But the normal scientist "has been badly taught. He has been taught in a dogmatic spirit: he is the victim of indoctrination". Normal science is "a danger to science and, indeed, to our civilization"

In 1972 Popper published a second collection of his essays entitled Objective Knowledge. One of the essays makes the good point that common sense tends to combine two incompatible theses: common sense realism, and the epistemological view that knowledge comes flooding into our minds via the senses, rather like water being poured into a bucket-a view which Popper dubs "the bucket theory of the mind". Popper argues that these two theses clash, and that philosophers, registering this clash, have all too often held on to the bucket theory and rejected realism. But this, Popper argues, is exactly the wrong thing to do; one should hold on to realism, and reject the bucket theory.

Much of the rest of the book is devoted to developing and defending Popper's three-world view. There are, according to this view, three worlds: the physical world (world 1), the psychological or mental world (world 2), and the world of objective theories, propositions, arguments and problems (world 3). World 3 interacts with world 1 via world 2.

Popper argues that this interaction is demonstrated by the fact that scientific theories lead to new technology, world 1 phenomena, which would not exist were it not for the prior development of world 3 theories. Popper puts world 3 into a biological and evolutionary context: like the webs, nests and dams created by spiders, birds and beavers, so too world 3 is our creation but, once created, it acquires an objective existence independent of us.

This theme is continued in Popper's contribution to The Self and Its Brain (S.B.)a book written with the neurologist John Eccles. In this work, Popper develops a sustained argument in support of interactionism and his three-world view, and criticizes materialism, physicalism and the thesis that the physical world is (causally) closed. There is also an interesting chapter on the history of the mind-body problem, in which Popper argues for the questionable thesis that the problem was recognized independently of, and before the arrival of, anything like the modern scientific view of the world.

What is one to make of this three-world view? Popper is surely right to hold that the contents of theories need to be distinguished from their linguistic forms (and from the causal effects these linguistic forms can have on appropriately educated brains). Popper is also right, surely, to stress that in order to make human sense of human action, we need to attend to the contents of theories. But it is quite another matter to argue, as Popper does, that world 3 entities, such as contents of theories, exist as full-blooded, almost Platonic entities, poltergeistic intellectual objects capable of influencing material phenomena via their influence on conscious minds. Popper overlooks or ignores the possibility that the material world may be causally closed but not explanatorily closed. He overlooks, that is, the possibility that physical phenomena, such as those associated with human actions and human technology, can be explained and understood in two distinct (but perhaps interdependent) ways: (1) physically and causally, in terms of physical theory, and (2) "personalistically", in terms of the intentions, plans and ideas of people. Such a view would hold that personalistic explanation is compatible with, but not reducible to, physical explanation. This view would give to the contents of theories a vital role in the (personalistic) explanation of human actions and the development of technology, without in any way undermining the existence, in principle, of a purely physical, causal explanation of physical phenomena associated with human action and technology (see

Popper insists that his world 3 entities differ from Plato's Forms in that they are man-made, they consist of theories, including false theories, and problems, rather than reified concepts or essences, and there is no suggestion that world 3 objects can be known with certaintyBut even if Popper's world 3 entities do not have implausible epistemological Platonic features, they most certainly have highly implausible ontological and causal Platonic features, in that they have causal effects on the material world (via their influence on conscious minds). That the elderly Popper should espouse such an implausible Platonic doctrine almost seems like Plato's revenge for the youthful Popper's onslaught against him.