These nine defects, the two basic failures with which we began and the seven consequential defects, (a) to (g), are, taken together, very serious indeed. 2 Despite its immense empirical success, OQT must be declared to be an unacceptably defective theory. It is the best of theories, and the worst of theories.In opposition to this conclusion, it may be argued that all physical theories, even a classical theory such as Newtonian theory (NT), must call upon additional theory to be tested empirically. In testing predictions of NT concerning the position of a planet at such and such a time, optical theory is required to predict the results of telescopic observations made here on earth. But this objection misses the point. NT is perfectly capable of issuing in physical predictions without calling upon additional theory, just because it has its own physical ontology. NT, plus initial and boundary conditions formulated in terms of the theory, can issue in the physical prediction that such and such a planet is at such and such a place at such and such a time, whether anyone observes the planet or not, without calling upon optical theory or any other theory. This OQT cannot do. It cannot do this because it lacks its own quantum ontology, having failed to solve the quantum wave/ particle problem. In order to deliver an unconditional physical prediction, OQT must call upon some part of classical physics, as a matter of necessity, so that the theory can refer to something physically actual. The case of NT and OQT are quite different, because NT postulates actually existing physical bodies whether observed or not, whereas QP does not; for that, one requires OQT, that is, QP + CP.

It may be objected that even if non-relativistic quantum theory fails to solve the wave/ particle problem, relativistic quantum theory, or quantum field theory, does solve the problem in that it declares that what exists is the quantum field, "particles" being discrete excitations of the field. But this objection misses the point as well. Orthodox quantum field theory (OQFT) is just as dependent on measurement, and thus on some part of classical physics, as non-relativistic OQT is. The quantum states of the quantum field of OQFT have to be interpreted as making probabilistic predictions about the results of performing measurements, just as in the case of OQT. A version of quantum field theory which succeeded in specifying the nature of the quantum field in a fully satisfactory way, so that the theory has its own quantum ontology entirely independent of any part of classical physics, would be able to issue in physical predictions about actual physical states of affairs entirely independently of measurement. Such a theory would be able to predict and explain macroscopic, quasi-classical phenomena as arising from the quantum field alone, without calling upon some part of classical physics for a treatment of measurement. This OQFT cannot do.

8.2 Probabilism to the rescue

What needs to be done to cure OQT of its serious defects? The primary task must be to specify precisely and unambiguously the nature of quantum entities so that quantum theory (QT) can be formulated as a testable theory about how these entities evolve and interact, without there being any mention of measurement or observables in the postulates of the theory at all. The key point that needs to be appreciated, I suggest, in order successfully to complete this task, is that the quantum domain is fundamentally probabilistic.It is this that the manifestly probabilistic character of QT is trying to tell us.

The approach to solving the mysteries of the quantum domain that I am suggesting here has been long ignored largely because of the accidents of history. When quantum theory (QT) was being developed and interpreted, during the first three decades of the last century, two opposing camps developed: the Bohr-Heisenberg camp, which argued for the abandonment of micro-realism, and the abandonment of determinism; and the Einstein-Schrödinger camp, which argued for the retention of realism, and the retention of determinism. One result of this polarization of views was that the idea of retaining realism but abandoning determinism was overlooked. But it is just this overlooked option, I maintain, which gives us our best hope of curing the defects of QT. One might call this option probabilistic micro-realism.

Once we acknowledge that the quantum domain is fundamentally probabilistic, so that the basic laws governing the way quantum systems interact with one another are probabilistic, it is clear that measurement cannot be a satisfactory necessary and sufficient condition for probabilistic transitions to occur. Probabilistic transitions must be occurring in nature whether or not physicists are around to dub certain processes "measurements". The very notion of measurement is in any case, as we have seen, inherently imprecise. We require a new, precise, necessary and sufficient condition for probabilistic transitions to occur, to be specified in fundamental, quantum mechanical terms. Furthermore, once the fundamentally probabilistic character of the quantum domain is acknowledged, it immediately becomes clear how the key quantum wave/ particle problem is to be solved. If the quantum domain is fundamentally probabilistic, then the physical entities of this domain-electrons, atoms and the rest-cannot possibly be classical, deterministic entities-classical particles, waves or fields. Quite generally, we should hold that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the dynamical laws of a physical theory on the one hand, and the entities and their physical properties postulated by the theory, on the other hand. In speaking of the entities, and the properties of entities, postulated by a physical theory, we are thereby speaking, in other terms, of the dynamical laws of the theory. Hence, change dynamical laws in some basic way, and we thereby change postulated physical entities and their properties. In particular, change dynamical laws dramatically, so that they become probabilistic instead of being deterministic, and the nature of postulated physical entities must change dramatically as well. Quantum entities, interacting with one another probabilistically, must be quite different from all physical entities so far encountered within deterministic classical physics.