

But the adoption of this "requirement of simplicity" (as Popper calls it) as a basic methodological principle of science, has the effect of permanently excluding from science all ad hoc theories (such as T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 ) that fail to satisfy the principle, however empirically successful such theories might be if considered. This amounts to assuming permanently that the universe is such that no ad hoc theory, that fails to satisfy Popper's principle of simplicity, is true. It amounts to accepting, as a permanent item of scientific knowledge, the substantial metaphysical thesis that the universe is non-ad hoc, in the sense that no theory that fails to satisfy Popper's principle of simplicity is true. But this clashes with Popper's criterion of demarcation: that no unfalsifiable, metaphysical thesis is to be accepted as a part of scientific knowledge.It is, in fact, important that Popper's criterion of demarcation is rejected, and the metaphysical thesis of non-ad hocness is explicitly acknowledged to be a part of scientific knowledge. The thesis, in the form in which it is implicitly adopted at any given stage in the development of science, may well be false. Scientific progress may require that it be modified. The thesis needs to be made explicit, in other words, for good Popperian reasons, namely, so that it can be critically assessed, and perhaps improved. As long as Popper's demarcation criterion is upheld, the metaphysical thesis must remain implicit, and hence immune to criticism.Popper's falsificationism can be modified, however, so that substantial metaphysical theses, implicit in methods that exclude ad hoc theories, are made explicit within science, and are acknowledged to be basic items of (conjectural) scientific knowledge, thus becoming open to critical scrutiny and revision. The outcome is a more rational, a more intellectually rigorous kind of science, just because substantial, influential and problematic metaphysical theses, implicit in the methods of science, become explicitly criticizable and improvable.

The moment we acknowledged that there is a persistent metaphysical thesis implicit in the methods of science, two new problems leap to our attention. What, precisely, does this metaphysical thesis assert? And on what grounds is it to be (conjecturally) accepted as a part of scientific knowledge? AOE is put forward as the solution to these two problems.

As far as the first of the above two problems is concerned, a wide range of metaphysical theses are available. At one extreme, we might adopt a metaphysical thesis that excludes only utterly silly theories; at the other extreme, we might adopt the thesis that the universe is physically comprehensible in the sense that it has a unified dynamic structure, some yet-to-be-discovered unified physical "theory of everything" being true-a thesis that I shall call "physicalism". We might even adopt some specific version of physicalism, which asserts that the underlying physical unity is of a specific type: it is made up of a unified field perhaps, or a quantum field, or empty, curved, topologically complex space-time, or a quantum string field. Other things being equal, the more specific the thesis (and thus the more it excludes) so the more likely it is to be false, whereas the more unspecific it is so the more likely it is to be true.

As far as the second of the above two problems is concerned, there are three considerations that we can appeal to, wholly Popperian in spirit if not to the letter of Popperian doctrine:

(1) If some metaphysical thesis, M, is implicit in some scientific methodological practice, then science is more rigorous if M is made explicit, since this facilitates criticism of it, the consideration of alternatives. (2) A metaphysical thesis may be such that its truth is a necessary condition for it to be possible for us to acquire knowledge: if so, accepting the thesis explicitly can only help, and cannot undermine, the pursuit of knowledge of truth. (3) Given two rival metaphysical theses, M 1 and M 2 , it may be the case that M 1 supports an empirical scientific research programme that has apparently met with far greater empirical success than any rival empirical research programme based on M 2 : in this case we may favour M 1 over M 2 , at least until M 2 , or some third thesis, M 3 , shows signs of supporting an even more empirically progressive research programme.

Two difficulties arise, however, when one attempts to use

to select the best available metaphysical thesis from the infinitely many options available. As far as

is concerned, any thesis sufficiently substantial to exclude empirically successful crackpot theories from science is such that acquisition of knowledge might still be possible even if the thesis is false. On the other hand, any thesis such that its truth is necessary for knowledge to be acquired is much too insubstantial to exclude crackpot theories. As far as

is concerned, given any metaphysical thesis, M, that supports a non-crackpot empirically progressive scientific research programme, we can mimic this with a crackpot M* that supports a crackpot empirically progressive research programme, with a series of crackpot theories, T 1 *, T 2 *, …, these theories becoming progressively more and more empirically successful, and closer and closer to exemplifying M*. These two difficulties can be overcome, however, if physics is construed as adopting a hierarchy of metaphysical conjectures concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe, these conjectures becoming more and more insubstantial as one ascends the hierarchy, more and more likely to be true (see