The problem with this argument is that it does not provide grounds for accepting a metaphysical conjecture that has sufficient content to exclude empirically successful aberrant physical theories of the kind that physics does, in practice, exclude (or just ignore). We can easily imagine a universe which is such that there is no underlying unity of physical law, and yet human life is possible, and new knowledge can be acquired.

A rather more Popperian argument would be that we should accept that metaphysical conjecture which holds out the greatest promise of scientific progress. But any such argument faces the difficulty that there will always be equally valid arguments for aberrant metaphysical conjectures that promise success for aberrant science (science with a succession of empirically successful aberrant theories).

In attempting to justify acceptance of a metaphysical conjecture of science, there are four considerations that we may appeal to, three of which are wholly Popperian in spirit if not in the letter of Popperian doctrine:

(1) If some metaphysical thesis, M, is implicit in some scientific methodological practice, then science is more rigorous if M is made explicit, since this facilitates criticism of it, the consideration of alternatives. (2) A metaphysical thesis may be such that its truth is a necessary condition for it to be possible for us to acquire knowledge: if so, accepting the thesis can only help, and cannot undermine, the pursuit of knowledge of truth. (3) Given two rival metaphysical theses, M 1 and M 2 , it may be the case that M 1 supports an empirical scientific research programme that has apparently met with far greater empirical success than any rival empirical research programme based on M 2 : in this case we may favour M 1 over M 2 , at least until M 2 , or some third thesis, M 3 , shows signs of supporting an even more empirically progressive research programme. 14 (4) M 1 may be preferred to M 2 on the grounds that it gives greater promise of supporting an empirically progressive research programme.

The above discussion has revealed that these four considerations fail to provide a justification for accepting the metaphysical thesis of physics.

To sum up. Intellectual rigour requires that physics acknowledges that there is a substantial metaphysical thesis implicit in its persistent acceptance of unified theories even though endlessly many empirically more successful disunified rivals are always potentially available. Two problems arise, however, once this metaphysical thesis of physics is acknowledged. What should we take this metaphysical thesis to assert? And what grounds are there for accepting it as a part of scientific knowledge? So far, no satisfactory solution to these two problems has been forthcoming.

These two problems can be solved, however, if physics is construed as adopting, not just one metaphysical conjecture, but a hierarchy of such conjectures concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe, these conjectures becoming more and more insubstantial as one ascends the hierarchy, more and more likely to be true (see1). We need, in short, to adopt the hierarchical view sketched in section 2.1. This hierarchical view of aim-oriented empiricism (AOE) is a radical improvement over Popper's falsificationism. In this section I expound AOE (in a little more detail than the introductory exposition of section 2.1) and indicate how it solves the two problems just mentioned; I indicate further how it solves the methodological problem of induction and the related problem of simplicity, and then consider possible objections.

At level 7 there is the thesis that the universe is such that we can continue to acquire knowledge of our local circumstances, sufficient to make life possible. At level 6 there is the more substantial thesis that there is some rationally discoverable thesis about the nature of the universe which, if accepted, makes it possible progressively to improve methods for the improvement of knowledge. "Rationally discoverable", here, means at least that the thesis is not an arbitrary choice from infinitely many analogous theses. At level 5 we have the even more substantial thesis that the universe is comprehensible in some way or other, whether physically or in some other way. This thesis asserts that the universe is such that there is something (God, a tribe of gods, a cosmic goal, a physical entity, a cosmic programme or whatever), which exists everywhere in an unchanging form and which, in some sense, determines or is responsible for everything that changes (all change and diversity in the world in principle being explicable and understandable in terms of the underlying unchanging something). A universe of this type deserves to be called "comprehensible" because it is such that everything that occurs, all change and diversity, can in principle be explained and understood as being the outcome of the operations of the one underlying something, present throughout all phenomena. At level 4 we have the still more substantial thesis that the universe is physically comprehensible in some way or other (a thesis I shall call physicalism 15 ). This asserts that the universe is made up of one unified self-interacting physical entity (or one kind of entity), all change and diversity being in principle explicable in terms of this entity. What this amounts to is that the universe is such that some yet-to-be-discovered unified physical theory of everything is true. At level 3 we have an even more substantial thesis, the best currently available specific idea as to how the universe is physically comprehensible. This asserts that everything is made of some specific kind of physical entity: corpuscle, point-particle, classical field, quantum field, convoluted space-time, string or whatever. Because the thesis at this level is so specific, it is almost bound to be false (even if the universe is physically comprehensible in some way or other). Here, ideas evolve with evolving knowledge. At level 2 we have our best fundamental physical theories, currently general relativity and the so-called standard model, and at level 1 we have empirical data (low-level experimental laws).