. There is no need to study or criticize my proposed solution to the problem of induction: I am playing a well-known mug's game.

There is not much that I can do about the first five reasons for ignoring my work on the problem of induction; I can, however, at least set out to demolish the sixth reason. This is what I propose to do in what follows. I first give a brief sketch of my proposed solution to the problem of induction (spelled out in much greater detail elsewhere); I then demolish the thesis that it amounts to van Fraassen's "mug's game".My hope is that this may provoke one or two readers to take note of what I have done elsewhere.7.1 Aim-oriented empiricism and the problem of induction

In order to solve the problem of induction, it is both necessary and sufficient to construe science from the standpoint of aim-oriented empiricism 6 (already encountered in Chapters 2, 3, 5 and 6).Profound, far-reaching consequences come from rejecting all versions of the current orthodoxy of standard empiricism, and accepting aim-oriented empiricism instead. The reasons for rejecting standard empiricism and accepting aim-oriented empiricism deserve to be subjected to especially fierce scrutiny. I therefore, in this section, carefully spell out these reasons once more. Any reader already convinced may skip this section. In subsequent sections, I argue that aim-oriented empiricism solves the "methodological" and "theoretical" problems of induction, demolish the thesis that aim-oriented empiricism represents a mug's game, and conclude by showing how the view solves what may be called the "practical" problem of induction.

The fundamental line of thought behind aim-oriented empiricism (AOE) can be indicated like this. Theoretical physics, and therefore all of natural science (since theoretical physics is fundamental for natural science), persistently selects fundamental physical theories that help to unify the whole of theoretical physics. Thus Newtonian theory (NT) unifies Galileo's laws of terrestrial motion and Kepler's laws of planetary motion (and much else besides). Maxwellian classical electrodynamics, (CEM), unifies electricity, magnetism and light (plus radio, infrared, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays). Special relativity (SR) brings greater unity to CEM (in revealing that the way one divides up the electromagnetic field into the electric and magnetic fields depends on one's reference frame). SR is also a step towards unifying NT and CEM in that it transforms space and time so as to make CEM satisfy a basic principle fundamental to NT, namely the (restricted) principle of relativity. SR also brings about a unification of matter and energy, via the most famous equation of modern physics, E = mc 2 , and partially unifies space and time into Minkowskian space-time. General relativity (GR) unifies space-time and gravitation, in that, according to GR, gravitation is no more than an effect of the curvature of space-time. Quantum theory (QM) and atomic theory unify a mass of phenomena having to do with the structure and properties of matter, and the way matter interacts with light. Quantum electrodynamics unifies QM, CEM and SR. Quantum electroweak theory unifies (partially) electromagnetism and the weak force. Quantum chromodynamics brings unity to hadron physics (via quarks) and brings unity to the eight kinds of gluons of the strong force. The standard model unifies to a considerable extent all known phenomena associated with fundamental particles and the forces between them (apart from gravitation). The theory unifies to some extent its two component quantum field theories in that both are locally gauge invariant (the symmetry group being U(1) × SU(2) × SU(3)). String theory, or M-theory, holds out the hope of unifying all phenomena.It might be thought that, during the last four hundred years or so, science has been pursued in a thoroughly open-minded, unbiased fashion, theories being selected impartially on the basis of empirical success alone, the emergence of increasing theoretical unity being a surprising and purely empirical discovery-unifying theories just being much more empirically successful than disunified rivals. Nothing could be further from the truth. In fact, in connection with every accepted unifying theory-NT, CEM and the rest-there have always been endlessly many, easily formulated, disunified rival theories very much more empirically successful than the theories that have been accepted.Thus, given NT, for example, one rival theory might assert: everything occurs as NT asserts up till midnight tonight when, abruptly, an inverse cube law of gravitation comes into operation. A second rival theory might assert: everything occurs as NT asserts, except for the case of any two solid gold spheres, each having a mass of 1,000 tons, moving in otherwise empty space up to a mile apart, in which case the spheres attract each other by means of an inverse cube law of gravitation. A third rival asserts that everything occurs as NT asserts until 3 kilograms of gold dust and 3 kilograms of diamond dust are heated in a platinum flask to a temperature of 450ºC, in which case gravitation will instantly become a repulsive force everywhere. And so on. There is no limit to the number of rivals to NT that can be concocted in this way, each of which has all the predictive success of NT as far as observed phenomena are concerned but makes different predictions for some as yet unobserved phenomena.