Scientific practice seems almost to refute Lakatos's view.

But it does not refute AOE. According to Lakatos, in the end only empirical considerations, plus considerations of empirical content, restrict choice of theory; few restrictions are placed on how a body of theory may be modified to salvage it from refutation. AOE places much more severe restrictions on choice of theory. In addition to those that it has in common with Lakatos's view, AOE demands of a fundamental physical theory that it, together with other such theories, exemplifies physicalism, to a sufficient degree. This makes it very much more difficult to modify a body of theory so as to salvage it from refutation. Instant refutation is not surprising, granted AOE.Lakatos's view requires that science consists of competing research programmes. Unquestionably, the history of science reveals that competing research programmes have, on occasions existed. But it is not clear that all science has this character, as Lakatos's view would seem to require. After Heisenberg and Schrödinger had developed quantum theory in the mid 1920s, there continued to be debate about how the new theory should be interpreted, and whether the new theory, interpreted along the orthodox lines advocated by Bohr, Heisenberg and others, was ultimately acceptable. But there was nothing like a competing research programme. Viewed from the perspective of AOE, all this makes perfect sense. There were indeed serious grounds for regarding the new theory as unsatisfactory (see Chapter 3; see alsoBut the new theory had achieved such striking successes, it was rational to conjecture that progress lay in developing the new theory, applying it to new phenomena, reconciling it with special relativity-in doing something like Kuhnian normal science, in other words-rather than in trying to develop a rival theory, a rival research programme. (To say this is not to say that serious attention should not have been given to the theoretical defects of orthodox quantum theory.) Not only does the history of science fail to reveal that there are always competing research programmes, whenever a new theory arrives on the scene that meets with extraordinary empirical success and no refutation, no good rationale may exist for inventing a rival research programme. (As we have seen, unlike Popper's falsificationism and Lakatos's research programme view, AOE holds that something like Kuhn's normal science may well be rational, as long as it is accompanied by some sustained tackling of problems associated with the currently accepted blueprint. This may, eventually, but not immediately, lead to the development of a new fundamental theory, a new research programme.)

There are other, much more decisive ways in which AOE is an improvement over Lakatos's view. Lakatos's methodology of research programmes inherits a number of unsolved problems from its two sources, Popper and Kuhn. Like Popper and Kuhn, Lakatos has no solution to the problem of what the simplicity, unity or explanatory character of a theory, or hard core, is; AOE, as I have indicated briefly above, solves the problem without difficulty. In failing to say what simplicity is, Lakatos also fails to articulate with any precision that part of scientific method concerned with simplicity; AOE faces no difficulty here either. Like Popper and Kuhn, Lakatos can say nothing useful about how new theories, new hard cores, are created or discovered; AOE, as a result of including levels 3 and 4 within the domain of scientific knowledge, is able to specify a rational, if fallible and non-mechanical, method for the creation of new theories, even new fundamental theories of physics. Finally, Lakatos's view fails to solve the problem of verisimilitude, a problem which can be readily solved granted AOE.

Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos, despite their differences, have one big failure in common (the source of almost all the others). All three take for granted that:

(A) In science no untestable but nevertheless substantial thesis about the world can be accepted as a part of scientific knowledge in such a firm way that theories which clash with it, even if highly successful empirically, are nevertheless rejected.

Popper accepts (A) in that, for him, untestable theses are metaphysical, and therefore not a part of scientific knowledge. Kuhn holds it, because, for Kuhn, nothing theoretical survives a revolution. Kuhn's acceptance of (A) is also apparent in his whole treatment of revolutions: precisely because Kuhn accepts (A), Kuhn cannot invoke anything like the level 4 thesis of physicalism to assess rival paradigms during a revolution, when empirical considerations are inconclusive. The Kuhnian irrationality of revolutions is a consequence of scientists accepting (A); and in so far as Kuhn thinks this irrationality is inevitable, Kuhn accepts (A) as well.

A case could be made out for saying that Lakatos came near to rejecting (A) in arguing for the need for science to adopt a conjectural metaphysical inductive principle which, if true, would more or less guarantee that Popperian, or rather Lakatosian, methods deliver authentic theoretical knowledge.

But Lakatos here missed the fundamental point, central to AOE, and highly Popperian in spirit, that our current methods are all too likely to be more or less the wrong methods to adopt, the metaphysics implicit in these methods being false. There is thus a vital need, for the sake of scientific progress, to make this false metaphysics explicit so that it can be criticized, so that alternatives can be developed and considered, leading to improved metaphysics and methods. In order to do this in the best possible way, we need to develop a hierarchy of metaphysical theses to form a framework of relatively unproblematic theses, at the top of the hierarchy, below which more specific and problematic theses may be developed and assessed, especially in the light of their potential and actual empirically progressive character.