

And yet, astonishingly, MAI does not even include explanatory power in its list of aesthetic properties of theories, despite its openended, all-inclusive approach to listing such properties (in such sharp contrast to AOE).

MAI does hold that the requirement of type (2) explanatory power is a permanent criterion of science, one that can be arrived at by aim-analysis, taking the aim of science to be empirical adequacy. It is clear that type (2), and not merely type (1), explanatory power is intended here, for McAllister writes that a successful explanatory theory is deemed to have "identified a pattern or mechanism underlying the data". But such an analysis could only, at most, justify adopting the requirement of type (1) explanatory power; it does not justify adopting type (2) explanatory power as a requirement-not unless the truth, the universe that is, is permanently presumed to have a more or less unified dynamic structure (a presumption which contradicts SE). McAllister provides no argument in support of the contention that favouring theories with type (2) explanatory power can be justified by an appeal to the aim of empirical adequacy. He does refer to an approach to the problem of induction, espoused by Braithwaite and Mellor, according to which we are justified in proceeding as if regularities or patterns exist in nature because this gives us the best hope of acquiring knowledge whatever the universe may be like. It is this argument, perhaps, which McAllister assumes justifies taking type (2) explanatory power as a permanent criterion for theory choice, arrived at by aim-analysis, taking the aim of science to be empirical adequacy.

But there are three things wrong with this. First, the Braithwaite-Mellor justification of induction does not work, as I shall show in the next section.

Second, many different kinds of explanation are possible; the universe may be comprehensible (phenomena being explainable) in many different ways, and to many different degrees, as the different theses from levels 3 to 7 of AOE attest. Here, above all, science needs to be flexible and responsive, constantly modifying the kind of explanations to be sought in the light of empirical success and failure, in the kind of way in which the hierarchical methodological structure of AOE is designed to facilitate. If ever there was a role for the aesthetic induction, it would surely be here, in connection with explanatory power. But in excluding type (2) explanatory power from the list of aesthetic properties, and in making it a fixed, unchanging requirement of theory choice, MAI fails to exploit this vital need for science constantly to modify and improve the kind of explanations that it seeks. It is just this, by contrast, that is the key idea behind AOE.

Third, if McAllister's argument were successful, so that giving preference to theories that exhibit type (2) explanatory power could be justified by an appeal to the aim of empirical adequacy, then this would be a disaster for MAI, for it would obviate entirely the need for science to consider aesthetic properties of theories, and to employ the aesthetic induction. As I have argued above, all aesthetic properties of theories that have any methodological significance can be derived from the demand for unity-that is, the demand for type (2) explanatory power. Once type (2) explanatory power is acknowledged to be methodologically significant, no other aesthetic properties of theories are required by science.

I conclude this section by mentioning three further differences between AOE and MAI.

First, reasons given in defence of MAI for holding that aesthetic considerations are methodologically significant in science arise from the fact that scientists themselves have stressed their importance, and they do indeed seem to influence what theories are chosen in science. Reasons given in defence of AOE for holding that type (c) non-empirical considerations are methodologically important are much stronger: science becomes impossible if such considerations are not deployed to rule out endlessly many empirically successful but grossly ad hoc theories. Second, MAI, despite being a contribution to the rationalist conception of science, does not provide a basis for systematically correcting scientific practice. But AOE does. As I have already remarked, if a view genuinely increases our understanding of science, it would be surprising if it did not have implications for scientific practice. AOE passes this test, in emphasizing the need for explicit articulation of metaphysical theses at levels 3 and 4, and explicit tackling of the problems thereby generated.

Third, MAI and AOE conceive of the relationship between science and the philosophy of science differently. MAI takes the conventional view for granted: philosophy of science is a meta-discipline which seeks to spell out and justify methods implicit in successful scientific practice, but which is quite distinct from science itself. AOE upholds the unorthodox view that the philosophy of science is an integral part of science itself, influenced by and seeking to influence science, articulating and critically assessing actual and possible aims and methods for science, at various levels, the fundamental aim being to contribute to scientific progress. A new level 3 aim for physics, i.e. a new blueprint, plus associated new methods, might constitute a major contribution to theoretical physics, as well as being a contribution to the philosophy of physics. Einstein's special theory of relativity is an example. It puts forward both a modified blueprint (Newtonian space-time becoming Minkowskian space-time), and modified methods (Galilean invariance becoming Lorentz invariance): it is thus a major contribution to physics itself, which is also a contribution to the aims and methods of physics-that is, to the philosophy of physics.