

with N = 1.

On the other hand, however, it is reasonable to argue that that thesis should be accepted which has the least content that is just sufficient to exclude the empirically successful disunified theories that current methods of physics do exclude. We have almost no grounds for holding that any version of physicalism is true, or is more likely to be true than some other version. Whatever we choose, we are very likely to choose a thesis that is false. Our best bet, then, is to choose that thesis which has the least possible content which suffices to exclude those disunified theories that are excluded from physics, since the less the content of a thesis-other things being equal-the more likely it is to be true. As we shall see in section 5.6 below, this leads to a choice quite different from physicalism

Which of these conflicting lines of argument should be accepted? In answering this question, I proceed as follows. In section 5.5, I spell out the argument for holding that physicalism

is the most fruitful version of physicalism for physics. In section 5.6, I spell out the argument for accepting the minimal version of physicalism. And in section 5.7, I argue that a new conception of physics resolves the conflict.

5.5 Empirically fruitful metaphysics

Before I plunge into my argument for accepting physicalism(8), there is a preliminary question I must answer: why does the unique fruitfulness of physicalism(8) for physics, supposing it can be established, provide grounds for its acceptance?

The basic idea of PIR, as it applies to physics, is that substantial, problematic, influential and implicit metaphysical assumptions need to be made explicit so that they can be critically assessed, so that alternatives can be developed and considered, in the hope that assumptions more conducive to progress can be developed and accepted. In other words, according to PIR, that assumption ought to be accepted which seems to be the most conducive to progress in theoretical physics.

It is important to appreciate just how profoundly influential over the success or failure of theoretical physics choice of metaphysical thesis, of the kind we are considering, is likely to be. This influence is exercised in two ways. First, the metaphysical presupposition of a community of physicists influences-even determines-the direction in which physicists look in order to develop new physical theories. If physicists are convinced-as many were for much of the nineteenth century-that the universe is made up of point atoms which interact by means of centrally directed, rigid forces, then physicists will persistently seek to develop theories which postulate such entities. Physicists who believe that the basic stuff of the universe is energy may be prompted to develop theories of a rather different type. Second, and even more important, the metaphysical presupposition of physics, implicit in non-empirical methods of physics, influences-or co-determines (with evidence)-what theories are accepted and rejected. The success or failure of physics will be highly dependent on whether the non-empirical methods adopted-and thus the corresponding metaphysical theses presupposed-are, or are not, conducive to the selection of theories capable of meeting with empirical success. Adopting the methodological principle "accept only theories that postulate atoms" amounts to presupposing that the universe is made up of atoms (or at least behaves, to a high degree of approximation, as if it is): if this is correct, this presupposition and associated methodological principle may well lead to empirical success. But if the universe is not made up of atoms, and does not even behave as if it is, adopting this methodological principle and presupposing the associated metaphysical thesis is likely to severely stifle scientific progress. In short, physics must make some metaphysical presupposition for there to be any theoretical knowledge in physics at all. Since the metaphysical theses in question are about the ultimate nature of the universe, the domain of our ignorance, whatever we assume is almost bound to be false. Accepting a false assumption is likely to severely stifle progress in the theoretical physics. It matters enormously, for the progress of physics, that a good choice of metaphysical thesis is made. Just about the only grounds we have for preferring one thesis to another is that one seems to be more conducive to progress in theoretical physics than another. Thus we ought to prefer that thesis which seems to be the most conducive to progress in physics. This is the choice physics needs to make in order to comply with the requirement of rigour of PIR.

Here, now, are the reasons for holding that physicalism(8) should be the preferred metaphysical thesis for physics, largely because this thesis has proved to be more fruitful for progress in physics than any rival thesis.

First, it deserves to be noted that what needs to be made explicit and accepted, if physics is to comply with PIR, is that thesis which is implicit in the current non-empirical methods of physics-methods that determine which theories are to be accepted and rejected on grounds of simplicity, unity, explanatoriness. There can be no doubt that, as far as non-empirical considerations are concerned, the more nearly a new fundamental physical theory satisfies all eight of the above requirements for unity, with N = 1, the more acceptable it will be deemed to be.