; this means it is quite unfit to provide any kind of guide for life.

Here, briefly, are my replies. (a) Some proposals for action can be shown to be unacceptable quite decisively as a result of experience acquired through attempting to put the proposal into action. Where this is not possible, it may still be possible to assess the merits of the proposal to some extent by means of experience. If assessing proposals for action by means of experience is much more indecisive than assessing scientific theories by means of experiment, then we need, all the more, to devote our care and attention to the former case. (b) Precisely because experimentation in life is so much more difficult than in science, it is vital that in life we endeavour to learn as much as possible from (i) experiments that we perform in our imagination, and (ii) experiments that occur as a result of what actually happens. (c) Because humanity does not have the aptitude or desire for wisdom that scientists have for knowledge, it is unreasonable to suppose that progress towards global wisdom could be as explosively rapid as progress in science. Nevertheless progress in wisdom might go better than it does at present.

(d) Cooperative rationality is only feasible when there is the common desire of those involved to resolve conflicts in a cooperatively rational way. (e) Aim-oriented rationality can help us improve our decisions about what is desirable or of value, even if it cannot reach decisions for us. (f) In taking science as a guide for life, it is the progress-achieving methodology of science to which we need to attend. It is this that we need to generalize in such a way that it becomes fruitfully applicable, potentially, to all that we do. That modern science is male-dominated, fiercely competitive, and at times terrifyingly impersonal should not deter us from seeing what can be learned from the progress-achieving methods of science-unless, perhaps, it should turn out that being male-dominated, fiercely competitive and impersonal is essential to scientific method and progress. (But this, I submit, is not the case.)

10.9 Implications for academic inquiry

Popper's version of the Enlightenment Programme, as enshrined in his first four books, has major implications, still unacknowledged by many, for a wide range of human endeavours, such as politics, education, the arts, philosophy and the humanities. But when developed further, in ways indicated above, the Popperian Enlightenment has even more fruitful, dramatic widespread implications. It is hardly too much to say, in my view, that the upshot of the argument is that we require a social and cultural revolution as substantial and dramatic, perhaps, as that of the Reformation, the Scientific Revolution, or the eighteenth-century Enlightenment itself. This revolution involves changing the Traditional Enlightenment and the Romantic opposition so that these become unified in the New Enlightenment; it involves appropriately modifying all those activities and institutions affected by the Traditional Enlightenment and the Romantic opposition so that they come to embody the New Enlightenment: science, art, politics, education, medicine, philosophy, law, industry, agriculture, education.

In particular, it involves changing academic inquiry so that, instead of being shaped by the Traditional Enlightenment (modified somewhat by Popper) and the Romantic opposition, as at present, it comes to be shaped by the New Enlightenment. I conclude this chapter with a list of twenty-three structural changes that need to be made to academic inquiry if it is to come to embody the New Enlightenment. The upshot would be universities rationally devoted to helping us realize what is of value in life, rationally devoted to helping us make progress towards as enlightened a world as possible.

how academic inquiry must change to put the New enlightenment into practice 1. There needs to be a change in the basic intellectual aim of inquiry, from the growth of knowledge to the growth of wisdom-wisdom being taken to be the capacity and active endeavour to realize what is of value in life, for oneself and others, and thus including knowledge, understanding and technological know-how (but much else besides). 2. There needs to be a change in the nature of academic problems, so that problems of living are included, as well as problems of knowledge-the former being treated as intellectually more fundamental than the latter. 3. There needs to be a change in the nature of academic ideas, so that proposals for action are included as well as claims to knowledge-the former, again, being treated as intellectually more fundamental than the latter. 4. There needs to be a change in what constitutes intellectual progress, so that progress-in-ideas-relevant-to-achieving-a-morecivilized-world is included as well as progress in knowledge, the former being indeed intellectually fundamental.

5. There needs to be a change in the idea as to where inquiry, at its most fundamental, is located. It is not esoteric theoretical physics, but rather the thinking we engage in as we seek to achieve what is of value in life. Academic thought is a (vital) adjunct to what really matters, personal and social thought active in life. 6. There needs to be a dramatic change in the nature of social inquiry (reflecting points 1 to 5). Economics, politics, sociology, and so on, are not, fundamentally, sciences, and do not, fundamentally, have the task of improving knowledge about social phenomena. Instead, their task is threefold. First, it is to articulate problems of living, and propose and critically assess possible solutions, possible actions or policies, from the standpoint of their capacity, if implemented, to promote wiser ways of living. Second, it is to promote such cooperatively rational tackling of problems of living throughout the social world. And third, at a more basic and longterm level, it is to help build the hierarchical structure of aims and methods of aim-oriented rationality into personal, institutional and global life, thus creating frameworks within which progressive improvement of personal and social life aims-and-methods becomes possible. These three tasks are undertaken in order to promote cooperative tackling of problems of living-but also in order to enhance empathic or "personalistic" understanding between people as something of value in its own right. Acquiring knowledge of social phenomena is a vital but subordinate activity, engaged in to facilitate the above three fundamental pursuits. 7. Natural science needs to change, so that it includes at least three levels of discussion: evidence, theory and research aims. Discussion of aims needs to bring together scientific, metaphysical and evaluative consideration in an attempt to discover the most desirable and realizable research aims. It needs to influence, and be influenced by, exploration of problems of living undertaken by social inquiry and the humanities, and the public. 8. There needs to be a dramatic change in the relationship between social inquiry and natural science, so that social inquiry becomes intellectually more fundamental from the standpoint of tackling problems of living, promoting wisdom. Social inquiry influences choice of research aims for the natural and technological sciences, and is, of course, in turn influenced by the results of such research.