1.11 Quantum Theory

Volume three of The Postscript is called Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics (Q.T.S.P.)It is concerned with quantum theory and probability, interconnected issues which preoccupied Popper, on and off, throughout his working life.

Thus in Logik der, Popper tackled two problems concerning probability: How are probabilistic statements or theories to be interpreted? And how can probabilistic theories be falsifiable given that they are in principle "impervious to falsification"? In response to the first problem, Popper defended a version of von Mises' objective, frequency interpretation of probability. In response to the second, he insisted that probabilistic statements become falsifiable as a result of a methodological decision to treat them as falsifiable.

Logik der Forschung also devoted a chapter to problems of quantum theory. The main task is to criticize Bohr's and Heisenberg's orthodox interpretation of quantum theory (which gives equal weight to the two "complementary" pictures of particle and wave), and to provide an alternative which interprets the theory as an objective, realistic statistical theory about particles. Popper criticizes Heisenberg's interpretation of his uncertainty relations, which interprets these relations as placing restrictions on (simultaneous) measurement. Popper argues that these relations need to be interpreted as "scatter relations", restricting what can be predicted, and not what can be measured. Indeed, Popper argues, not only can we make measurements-for example, simultaneous measurements of position and momentum-that are more precise than allowed by the uncertainty relations as interpreted by Heisenberg, we need to do this in order to test these relations.

These issues are restated and further developed in The Postscript, taking into account relevant developments in quantum physics itself, such as John Bell's proof that local hidden variable versions of quantum theory cannot reproduce all the predictions of orthodox quantum theory, and experiments, such as those of Aspect, which seem to have refuted these local hidden variable theories. The main change in Popper's views is his development of his "propensity" interpretation of probability, and his application of this to quantum theory.

Popper's propensity idea is perhaps best understood in terms of an example. Consider tossing a die on a table. There is a certain probability of obtaining a six, which may or may not equal 1/ 6. This is determined by such things as properties of the die (e.g. whether or not it is made of a homogeneous material), the procedure for tossing and the properties of the table. It is this combination of properties that is, for Popper, the propensity: it is a property, determining a probability associated with some repeatable event (such as tossing the die), "of the whole repeatable experimental arrangement"In particular, then, the probabilistic statements of quantum theory can be interpreted as attributing propensities, not to individual electrons or photons as such, but rather to electrons or photons in the context of some specific, repeatable measurement.

Popper's views on quantum theory have been criticized by Paul Feyerabend, on the grounds that Popper fiercely criticizes Bohr but ends up defending a view very close to Bohr's. Because propensities are properties defined in terms of experimental arrangements, this means that Popper's propensity interpretation of quantum theory, just like Bohr's interpretation, brings in measurement in an essential way. Popper's reply is that propensities relate to "physical situations" which may, but need not be, experimental arrangementsBut this reply fails in two ways. First, the probabilistic predictions of standard quantum theory are restricted to measurements. If these predictions are to include "physical situations" that are not measurements, then they need to be specified, and need to have specified quantum observables associated with them, so that definite probabilistic predictions may be forthcoming: Popper provides nothing of this. Second, even if Popper did extend the interpretation of quantum theory in the way just indicated, the result would be a version of quantum theory which would reproduce most of the serious defects of the theory given Bohr's interpretation. These defects include being vague, ambiguous, ad hoc and non-explanatory, all resulting from the fact that the theory is made up of two incoherent parts, a quantum mechanical part, and a classical part specifying measurement or specific "physical situations".

It may, however, be possible to overcome these defects by modifying Popper's propensity version of quantum theory, so that quantum propensities determine probabilistically how quantum entities, such as electrons and photons, interact with each other (rather than with classically described, macroscopic, measuring instruments or "physical situations"). But this leads to a fully micro-realistic propensity version of quantum theory, very different from Popper's version (see). Quantum theory emerges as a theory that is about, not particles, but a new kind of probabilistic entity, the "propensiton" (as it may be called), which is neither a particle nor a wave, even though it has some features of both. Furthermore, according to such a version of quantum theory, probabilistic transitions involve something like "wave-packet collapse" as a real physical process: for Popper, any such idea is just another part of "the great quantum muddle". But what this indicates is that here, as elsewhere in his work, Popper's ideas, even when wrong or inadequate, are nevertheless rich in fruitful suggestions and implications for further development.