

We only possess knowledge of such modest common-sense items in so far as we possess knowledge of the cosmological thesis (a). Science and common sense both make cosmological assumptions.

If these cosmological assumptions can be established to be true in such a way that we are justified in being confident of their truth, then there is the hope that we can be justifiably confident of the truth of both some empirical predictions of empirically successful theories, and modest items of common sense. But if the relevant cosmological theses are such that they cannot conceivably be established to be true in such a way that we are justified in being confident of their truth, then it follows straight away, from elementary logic, that we cannot conceivably be confident of the truth of either the predictions of scientific theories or the items of common sense. If our most modest, immediate, apparently secure items of common sense have implications for the nature of the entire cosmos that are irredeemably speculative and conjectural, then our modest items of common sense must themselves be irredeemably speculative and conjectural as well.

The relevant cosmological theses are indeed irredeemably speculative and conjectural, as everyone would surely admit. The conclusion is thus inescapable: scientific knowledge, and modest common-sense knowledge, are both irredeemably speculative and conjectural as well. If we demand of the solution to the justificational problem of induction that it restores our pre-Humean confidence in scientific and common-sense knowledge, then we demand the impossible. The attempt to restore such pre-Humean confidence can only undermine the rationality of science, in so far as it lulls us into a false sense of security, and leads us to believe that parts of our knowledge do not need critical scrutiny.

One demand that can be made of the correct solution to the justificational problem of induction is that it puts empirical data and scientific theories onto an equal epistemological footing. Ordinarily we assume we can be confident of the truth of factual statements about our immediate, observed surroundings: this is a table, that is a book, this is a Bunsen burner, and so on. Before encountering Hume (and his twentieth-century descendents, such as Einstein, Popper and Kuhn), we may feel equally confident of the truth (or approximate truth) of empirically successful, accepted scientific theories. But Hume's argument, reformulated a little, has the effect of opening up a gulf between evidence and theory. Any theory has infinitely many empirical consequences-and consequences for distant times and places. However many consequences we verify empirically, we will always be infinitely far away from verifying the theory. Even if particular items of evidence are known with absolute certainty, theories must, it seems, remain pure conjectures. They can be falsified, perhaps, but remain permanently unverifiable, to any degree whatsoever. The solution to the justificational problem must, it may be felt, remove this gulf in epistemological status between empirical data and theory.

AOE does just that, by making clear that empirical data, just like theories, contain permanently conjectural cosmological implications. All knowledge, theoretical, empirical and common sense, is irredeemably conjectural because of these conjectural cosmological implications.

But if this is the case, what grounds are there for holding that AOE solves the justificational problem of induction? How does AOE do any better than Popper's conjecturalist position? AOE, as we have seen, solves the methodological problem, whereas Popper's falsificationism fails to do this. As a result, AOE is able to solve a very important part of the justificational problem which falsificationism, notoriously, fails to solve. This is the problem of discriminating decisively between those conjectures about whose truth we are so confident that we are prepared to entrust our lives to their truth, and conjectures about whose truth we have no confidence at all. Every time we fly in an aeroplane, cross a suspension bridge, or imbibe medicine, we entrust our lives to the correctness of relevant items of scientific knowledge, and confidently take for granted that rival conjectures that can be concocted (ostensibly even more empirically successful but horribly ad hoc) which predict we will die are all false. Accounting for this difference deserves to be regarded as the nub of the justificational problem. AOE accounts fully for this dramatic difference, whereas falsificationism entirely fails to do this.

John Worrall has dramatized the problem as follows. We are, let us suppose, standing on top of the Eiffel Tower, and we are confronted by two rival conjectures: one says that if we jump we will float gently down to earth without harm; the other says we will fall in the usual way to our death. Only lunatics think the first a viable possibility; the rest of us are absolutely confident in the truth of the second conjecture. How is this confidence to be justified? No version of SE comes up with an adequate answer, especially as aberrant versions of Newtonian theory or general relativity can be concocted which predict that jumping on this occasion will lead to a soft, harmless landing, and which are empirically more successful than the non-aberrant versions of these theories. Can AOE justify our confidence that if we jump we will be killed?