

The following seven aspects of the problem can be distinguished:

(1) The terminological problem: How can simplicity, unity (etc.) be significant notions, having methodological significance, when the question of whether a theory is simple or complex, unified or disunified, will depend crucially on how the theory in question is formulated? A change of formulation can turn a simple theory into a complex one, and vice versa.

(2) How can degrees of simplicity, unity (etc.) be assessed? (3) How many diierent features of theories are involved? The plethora of terms used by scientists and philosophers of science in this context does not inspire confidence that people know what they are talkinggabout. (4) How can one do justice to the fact that conceptions of simplicity or unity evolve with evolving knowledge? Three of Newton's fourr rules of reasoning concern simplicity, and yet Newton's notions are diierent from those of a modern physicist. (5) How can one do justice to ambiguity of judgements concerning the relative simplicity or unity of theories? Thus Newton's theory of gravitation seems in one way much simpler than Einstein's, but in another way more complex, or at least less unified. (6) How is persistent preference for simple or unified theories in science, even against the evidence, to be justified? This is, it should be noted, the problem of induction. Solve this, and the problem of induction is solved.

What implications does the solution to these problems have for science itself?

By far the most serious item on this list is (1). IIshall concentrate on (1), and at the end will make a few remarks about

. Richard Feynman has provided the following amusing illustration of problem. Consider an appallingly complex universe governed by 10 10 quite diierent, distinct laws. Even in such a universe, the true "theory of everything" can be expressed in the dazzlingly simple, unified form::AA==0. Suppose the 10 10 distinct laws of the universeeare:

(1))FF==ma;

The true "theory of everything" of this universe can now be formulated as:A=0. (This is true if and only if each A r =0, for r=1, 2, …10 10 .)

Most scientists and philosophers of science recognize that nonempirical considerations of simplicity, etc., play an important role in science, but no one has been able so far to solve the terminological problem-problem (1). Weyl (1963, p. 155) remarked correctly that "The problem of simplicity is of central importance for the epistemology of the natural sciences". Einstein) recognized the problem but confessed that he was not "without more ado, and perhaps not at all" able to solve it.suggested that simplicity could be identified with paucity of adjustable constants in equations, but unfortunately number of constants can be changed by changes of formulation.proposed that simplicity is falsifiability, but unfortunately falsifiability can always be increased by adding on independently testable hypotheses which, in general, will drastically decrease simplicity. (Popper's adjunct proposal, in terms of dimension, does not work either, and is in any case subservient to falsifiability.) More recently,have sought to identify simplicity or unity with structural, formal or axiomatic features, but these attempts fail (see. Even more recently, Weber (1999),have tackled the problem without success-but see the excellent paper by Maudlin (1996) on unification of theoretical physics.constitutes an interesting attempt to solve the problem, and this will be discussed in Chapter 6.

4.2 The proposed solution

Previous attempts at solving the problem have failed because of mistakes concerning two crucial preliminary points.The first mistake is to formulate the problem, in the first instance, too generally as a problem about scientific theories. It is vital, in the first instance, to restrict the problem to fundamental, dynamical physical theories. Branches of the natural sciences are not independent of one another; they are interconnected. Biology presupposes chemistry, and even physics; chemistry presupposes physics; geology and astronomy presuppose physics; and phenomenological physics presupposes fundamental physics. All branches of natural science besides theoretical physics, in other words, are constrained by results from some more fundamental science that, in the end, can be traced back to theoretical physics. This is neither a pro-nor anti-reductionist thesis; it is just the simple observation that theories in non-physical branches of natural science are, in the end, in general, exceptions aside, constrained by physics. Only in fundamental theoretical physics does the question of the nature of non-empirical constraints on theories arise in something like a naked, pure form. We must, in the first instance, restrict the problem to that of fundamental, dynamical physical theory.