

But if science must accept, and not eschew, religious or metaphysical ideas, what grounds are there, it may be asked, for preferring physicalism to a thesis such as that God exists and benevolently arranges for the cosmos to be such as to make science possible? For my reply, see

The argument given above is a special case of a more general argument concerning Cartesianism. The proper fundamental problem of epistemology is the problem of how we can best improve knowledge (improve what we have inherited from the past). The Cartesian prescription says: throw everything away we have inherited from the past except that which cannot be doubted, or is most secure; taking this as a secure base, build up rigorous, reliable knowledge. This Cartesian prescription has exercised a profound influence on philosophy, on both so-called rationalists and on empiricists. Influencing the former it leads to the search for secure principles founded on reason; influencing the latter it leads to the idea that observational knowledge alone constitutes the only acceptable Cartesian secure base, it being necessary to build the rest of knowledge up from this secure base. This, of course, is the SE prescription; it is a version of the Cartesian prescription. But the Cartesian prescription must be rejected. The proper way to set about improving knowledge is to acknowledge the conjectural character of what we have inherited from the past, subject it to critical scrutiny, and put generalized AOE into practice. In direct opposition to Cartesianism, this involves in part taking most seriously ideas that are most vulnerable to being found to be false, namely the falsifiable theories of science. Far from giving priority to ideas immune to doubt, we need to give priority to ideas most vulnerable to doubt. In this way, as Popper stresses, we make it possible for us to learn from our mistakes. But this Popperian prescription needs itself to be modified, as we have seen, so that some unfalsifiable, metaphysical ideas, inherited from the past, continue to be accepted and developed as a part of scientific knowledge, those in particular being accepted which either (a) must be true if knowledge is to be possible at all, or (b) are most fruitful in leading to progress in empirical knowledge. The Cartesian prescription deserves to be resoundingly rejected, and along with it the SE prescription and SE requirement.

The problem of induction is not just a philosophical puzzle à la Wittgenstein. Its long-standing insolubility is indicative of a fundamental defect in our understanding of science and its relationship with metaphysics and philosophy-a fundamental defect in our whole culture. Science does not stand opposed to metaphysics and philosophy; it is metaphysics and philosophy carried on employing the improved methods of investigation of empiricism: observation and, above all, experimentation (a point enshrined in the seventeenth-century terms of "experimental" and "natural" philosophy). A basic task for philosophers today is to try to get across to the scientific community just how vital metaphysics and philosophy, properly conducted, are for science, so that scientists and philosophers can begin to collaborate on implementing AOE science, thus recreating natural philosophy.But this is unlikely to happen as long as AOE continues to be dismissed, so unjustly, as a mug's game.

Does probabilism solve the great quantum mystery?

8.1 Orthodox quantum theory is the best and worst of theories

What sort of entities are electrons, photons and atoms given their wavelike and particle-like properties? Is nature fundamentally deterministic or probabilistic? Any decent theory of the quantum domain, able to provide us with genuine knowledge and understanding of its nature, ought to provide answers to these childishly elementary questions. Orthodox quantum theory (OQT) evades answering these questions by being a theory, not about quantum systems as such, but rather about the results of performing measurements on such systems.This state of affairs came about as follows. Bohr, Heisenberg, Dirac and the other creators of OQT did not know how to solve the quantum wave/ particle dilemma. This created a grave problem for those seeking to develop quantum theory: How can one develop a consistent theory about entities that seem to be both wave-like and particle-like, as in the two-slit experiment, for example? Around 1925, Heisenberg hit upon the strategy of evading this fundamental dilemma by developing what subsequently became matrix mechanics as a theory exclusively about the results of performing measurements on quantum systems, this version of quantum theory thus not needing to specify the nature of quantum systems when not undergoing measurement. Schrödinger, a little later in 1926, developed wave mechanics in the hope that it would be a precise theory about the nature of quantum systems. This theory, Schrödinger hoped, would show the electron to be wave-like in character. But then Born successfully interpreted the Ψ function of Schrödinger's wave mechanics as specifying the probability of detecting the particle in question. According to Born's crucial interpretative postulate, |Ψ| 2 .dV gives the probability of detecting the particle in volume element dV if a position measurement is performed. Schrödinger proved that his theory and Heisenberg's matrix mechanics are equivalent: the outcome, a sort of synthesis of the two theories, is OQT.