

As to that which is of value, I hold that all that is of value in existence has to do with life, and especially, for us, with human life. Enjoyment in living; curiosity and wonder; perceptive awareness, understanding and appreciation of significant and beautiful aspects of the world; kindness, laughter, honesty, friendship, love, intimacy, cooperative creative work, personal responsibility, happiness, fulfilment: these are the kind of things that are of value. For each one of us, this short life is our only opportunity to discover, experience and take part in life of value; all too many people in the modern world-especially the developing worldlack this opportunity. We need to do all we can to change things so that all people everywhere have the opportunity to realize what is of most value in life. Value in the world has much to do with the diversity of life, the unique particularity of each individual life. A uniform world would be a world denuded of value. It is of the essence of value-it is essentially desirable and of value-that there be multiplicity and variety, amongst people, amongst ways of life, amongst societies and cultures. However, if this desirable variety is to flourish in this one crowded world, it is essential that we discover how to cooperate, to learn from and understand each other, in the midst of this variety. And there is a further point. As I have remarked above, much of what is of value in life comes directly from good things that go on between people-mutual understanding and appreciation, sharing, intimacy, cooperative creative work. Such interpersonal or social things, of value in themselves, only become possible in a world full of variety if there is cooperation, communication, learning and understanding amidst variety. Variety is only enriching in so far as there is understanding and learning between people amidst variety. It is to help facilitate all this that I advocate universalism (or critical fundamentalism). Universalism is put forward as a conception of learning and problem solving designed, above all, to help us resolve more adequately the third and fourth of the above fundamental problems.

Amongst other things, universalism amounts to a reply to social and cultural relativism. Like relativism, universalism acknowledges the existence and value of social, cultural and intellectual diversity. Unlike relativism, universalism recognizes that we all live in a common world in which we all have a real value, and that we all need to learn from one another so that mutual understanding and cooperation may flourish-so that what is of value in all our lives, potentially and actually, may flourish. The existence of a multiplicity of cultures need not prevent us from recognizing our common humanity, our common value, since it is at least possible for this multiplicity to be interlaced with and unified by a common acceptance of universalism.

Adoption of universalism is especially important for societies and cultures in the developing world. For in learning from the industrially advanced West-in acquiring the science, technology and industry of the West-there is always the grave danger that the indigenous culture and social order will simply be annihilated, as opposed to being helped to develop and flourish.A developing society can only avoid this danger by articulating, at a fundamental level, basic presuppositions, values and problems of the society, so that it becomes possible to discover how to develop these presuppositions and values, to solve these problems, in the new social and cultural circumstances made possible by the importation of Western ideas and techniques. Only in this way can such a society employ these ideas and techniques discriminatingly, for its own best purposes, instead of becoming a hollow imitation of the Western way of life. In addition, of course, the industrially advanced West has a special responsibility, in its interactions with the developing world, to construe its own social and cultural order in universalist (or critical fundamentalist) terms. Only cooperative universalism can enable a mutually desirable kind of learning to go on in both directions.

Analogous considerations arise in connection with education. The most profound, instinctive and passionate fundamentalist thinkers are of course very young children, since all children must, as a practical necessity, arrive at working answers to the four fundamental questions in order to become human. If education is to develop, and not annihilate, instinctively fundamentalist childish thought, then education must itself be organized along universalist (or critical fundamentalist) lines.Only those teachers who learn from their pupils really educate.To sum up: critical fundamentalist inquiry does justice to the Socratic and Kantian idea that reason forms a basis for the unity of mankind, in such a way as to encourage the flourishing of desirable kinds of diversity within this unity; it might be called "the tribal discussion of humanity". Of course, universalism cannot of itself vanquish tyranny, exploitation, manipulation, war, terrorism, crime. Universalism does, however, hold out the hope that if it is actively promoted in our personal, social, intellectual, economic and political lives wherever possible, then the spirit and practice of mutual cooperation between people may gradually grow, thus enabling us gradually to dismantle those social and cultural arrangements which tend to breed misunderstanding and mistrust, manipulation and exploitation, the use and abuse of power, the dreadful spiral of threat, counter-threat and violence.