

Universalism, in sharp disagreement with Popper, recognizes just one world. Within universalism, Popper's conceptually incoherent psycho-neurological thesis that world 3 interacts with world 1 via world 2, can be replaced by the kind of conceptually coherent psycho-neurological postulate indicated in note 11, or by a version of this postulate which asserts that aim-oriented rationalism is programmed into the neurological structure of our brains-or at least needs to be so "programmed" if we are to be able to achieve what is of value in life. (For an exposition of aim-oriented rationalism, see the Prologue and Chapter 10. See alsoThere is only one world; it is in this world that universalism and aim-oriented rationalism need to flourish. In order to help achieve this, it is essential that we see critical fundamentalist intellectual standards, aim-oriented rationality, as something embedded, actually and potentially, in this world. It is essentially this insight that we need to see implicit in much ofin order to appreciate the real value of that work, and in order to make sense of Popper's wonderful suggestion that we should see intellectual evolution as a development of biological evolution. In the circumstances it is somewhat tragic that Popper should have gone on, with the development of his three-world view, to reject explicitly the insight that reason needs to be seen as materially and socially embodied in this one world. 45. According to Popper, we must learn to live with the intense emotional strain of civilization, as the price that must be paid for reason, for the open society, for civilization. Any attempt to introduce social and cultural changes which alleviate this strain must be fiercely resisted, as such changes must inevitably lead to totalitarianism. However, as indicated in section 9.2, this is because Popper fails to conceive of the possibility of universalism, and is led as a result to defend a seriously irrational and undesirable conception of rational inquiry and civilization. See) for a related criticism of Popper's social and political rationalist philosophy. For purposes of clarification, I should indicate four further main differences between the viewpoint being advocated in this chapter, and views advocated or presupposed in Popper's writings. The chief difference, unquestionably, is simply this. I advocate that the basic aim of rational inquiry is to enhance wisdom. Here I part company not only with Popper, but with the whole Western tradition, in that this tradition gives to rational inquiry the basic aim of enhancing knowledge (human welfare, enlightenment and progress being only secondary and uncertain by-products of the basic and prior achievement of knowledge). As a result of giving priority to wisdom-to our living, actual capacity to discover and achieve what is of value in life-I am led to locate rational inquiry, at the most fundamental level, within and amidst our lives, personal and interpersonal or social. This leads me to stress the fundamental importance of aim-oriented rationalism designed to help us improve our aims, and thus our lives, as we live (aim-oriented empiricism being simply a special case of aim-oriented rationalism, applicable to science). This is in marked contrast to Popper's conception of reason, which he has called critical rationalism (falsificationism being simply, for Popper, a special case of critical rationalism, applicable to science). Since for me rational inquiry has, as its basic task, to help us achieve what is of value in life, I hold that all intellectual values need ultimately to be founded in human value-especially in the supreme value of each individual person, and the good things that can go on between people once this is recognized-rigorous, objective inquiry being, as though by definition, a universal tool perfectly designed to help us all maximally to achieve, or grow, life of value. I thus disagree absolutely with Popper's thesis-in effect a standard component of the philosophy of knowledge-that purely scientific values should be distinguished as sharply as possible from human or extra-scientific values. (This is Popper's sixteenth thesis in his "Reason or Revolution".) The purpose of the present essay is to argue that the rationality, the intellectual rigour, the objectivity, of inquiry is essentially bound up with the capacity of inquiry to help us resolve those problems of living we need to resolve in order to achieve what is of value in life. That which is of value in life is primary: intellectual value is a reflection of-or is subservient to-primary value in life. Ideasincluding the idea of this chapter-are spectacles intended to help us to see clearly what is of value in existence, actually and potentially; they are forks and spades designed to help us to cultivate what is of value in our lives, in reality. Like spectacles, ideas are to be assessed in terms of whether they serve to clarify or blur our vision; like forks and spades, ideas are to be assessed in terms of their use, their success in practice. The idea that intellectual value is dissociated from value in life, in the world, quite fundamentally misconceives the proper value and use of ideas: pushed to the extreme, this becomes Plato's doctrine of the forms. (The Popperian, Western doctrine of the autonomy of intellectual value devolves, in fact, from Plato's doctrine.) The idea that intellectual value needs to be conceived of as dissociated from value in the world-and not as integral to and contributing to value in the world-receives support no doubt from the desire of many intellectuals to find in intellectual work some kind of escape from the world, a quiet and transparent refuge. Given Popper's defence of the orthodox doctrine concerning the autonomy of purely scientific or intellectual value, it is not at all surprising that he should call Hume's thesis that "Reason is, and ought only to be, the slave of the passions" a "horrifying doctrine"