Granted, then, that the task of academic inquiry is to put the four rules of problem-solving rationality into practice in such a way as to help humanity learn how to make progress towards a civilized, enlightened world, the primary intellectual tasks must be:

1. To articulate, and try to improve the articulation of, those social problems of living we need to solve in order to make progress towards a better world.

2. To propose and critically assess possible, and actual, increasingly cooperative social actions-these actions to be assessed for their capacity to resolve human problems and conflicts, thus enhancing the quality of human life.

These intellectually fundamental tasks are undertaken by social inquiry and the humanities, at the heart of the academic enterprise. Social inquiry also has the task of promoting increasingly cooperatively rational tackling of problems of living in the social world-in such contexts as politics, commerce, international affairs, industry, agriculture, the media, the law, education. Academic inquiry also needs, of course, to implement the third rule of rational problem solving; that is, it needs:

3. To break up the basic problems of living into preliminary, simpler, analogous, subordinate, specialized problems of knowledge and technology, in an attempt to work gradually towards solutions to the basic problems of living.

But, in order to ensure that specialized and basic problem solving keep in contact with one another, the fourth rule of rational problem solving also needs to be implemented; that is, academic inquiry needs:

4. To interconnect attempts to solve basic and specialized problems, so that basic problem solving may guide, and be guided by, specialized problem solving.2 in Chapter 9 I have tried to depict the kind of inquiry that would emerge as a result of putting the above four rules of rational problem solving into academic practice, as just indicated. I will give some further details below.

There are a number of points to note about this "rational problem solving" conception of academic inquiry. Social inquiry is not, primarily, social science; it has, rather, the intellectually basic task of engaging in, and promoting in the social world, increasingly cooperatively rational tackling of conflicts and problems of living. 17 Social inquiry, so conceived, is actually intellectually more fundamental than natural science (which seeks to solve subordinate problems of knowledge and understanding). Academic inquiry, in seeking to promote cooperatively rational problem solving in the social world, must engage in a two-way exchange of ideas, arguments, experiences and information with the social world.

The thinking, the problem solving, that really matters, that is really fundamental, is the thinking that we engage in, individually, socially and institutionally, as we live; the whole of academic inquiry is, in a sense, a specialized part of this, created in accordance with rule 3, but also being required to implement rule 4 (so that social and academic problem solving may influence each other). Academic inquiry, on this model, is a kind of peoples' civil service, doing openly for the public what actual civil services are supposed to do, in secret, for governments. Academic inquiry needs just sufficient power to retain its independence, to resist pressures from government, industry, the media, religious authorities and public opinion, but no more. Academia proposes to, argues with, learns from, attempts to teach and criticizes all sectors of the social world, but does not instruct or dictate. It is an intellectual resource for the public, not an intellectual bully.

The basic intellectual aim of inquiry may be said to be, not knowledge, but wisdom-wisdom being understood to be the desire, the active endeavour and the capacity to realize what is desirable and of value in life, for oneself and others.Wisdom includes knowledge, know-how and understanding, but goes beyond them in also including the desire and active striving for what is of value; the ability to experience value, actually and potentially, in the circumstances of life; the capacity to help realize what is of value for oneself and others; the capacity to help solve those problems of living that need to be solved if what is of value is to be realized; the capacity to use and develop knowledge, technology and understanding as needed for the realization of value. Wisdom, like knowledge, can be conceived of not only in personal terms but also in institutional or social terms. Thus, the basic aim of academic inquiry, according to the view being indicated here, is to help us develop wiser ways of living; wiser institutions, customs and social relations; a wiser world.

So far academic inquiry has been characterized as having the task of helping humanity learn how to tackle its problems of living more rationally; nothing has been said about learning from experience. But, as I indicated above, the four rules of reason that we are considering are also rules for learning from experience; this has a vital role to play in the conception of inquiry we are considering. What we learn as a result of attempting to put into practice some proposed solution to a problem of living is of course all important for learning how to build a better world. A vital task for academic inquiry (especially for history) is to monitor the successes and failures of our past attempts at solving problems of living.