The really important point, however, in deciding what metaphysical assumption of unity to accept, is that what needs to be considered is not just current theoretical knowledge, or current methods, but the whole way theoretical physics has developed during the last four hundred, or possibly two thousand years. The crucial question is this: what metaphysical thesis does the best justice to the way theoretical physics has developed during this period in the sense that successive theories increasingly successfully exemplify and give precision to this metaphysical thesis in a way that no rival thesis does? The answer is physicalism(8), as the following considerations indicate.

All advances in theory in physics since the scientific revolution have been advances in unification, in the sense ofabove. Thus Newtonian theory (NT) unifies Galileo's laws of terrestrial motion and Kepler's laws of planetary motion (and much else besides): this is unification in senses (1) to (3). Maxwellian classical electrodynamics, (CEM), unifies electricity, magnetism and light (plus radio, infrared, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays): this is unification in sense (4). Special relativity (SR) brings greater unity to CEM, in revealing that the way one divides up the electromagnetic field into the electric and magnetic fields depends on one's reference frame: this is unification in sense (6). SR is also a step towards unifying NT and CEM in that it transforms space and time so as to make CEM satisfy a basic principle fundamental to NT, namely the (restricted) principle of relativity. SR also brings about a unification of matter and energy, via the most famous equation of modern physics, E = mc 2 , and partially unifies space and time into Minkowskian spacetime. General relativity (GR) unifies space-time and gravitation, in that, according to GR, gravitation is no more than an effect of the curvature of space-time: this is a step towards unification in senseQuantum theory (QM) and atomic theory unify a mass of phenomena having to do with the structure and properties of matter, and the way matter interacts with light: this is unification in senses (4) and (5). Quantum electrodynamics unifies QM, CEM and SR. Quantum electroweak theory unifies (partially) electromagnetism and the weak force: this is (partial) unification in sense (7). Quantum chromodynamics brings unity to hadron physics (via quarks) and brings unity to the eight kinds of gluons of the strong force: this is unification in sense (6). The standard model unifies to a considerable extent all known phenomena associated with fundamental particles and the forces between them (apart from gravitation): this is partial unification in senses (4) to (7). The theory unifies to some extent its two component quantum field theories in that both are locally gauge invariant (the symmetry group being U(1) × SU(2) × SU). All the current programmes to unify the standard model and GR known to me, including string theory or M-theory, seek to unify in sensesIn short, all advances in fundamental theory since Galileo have invariably brought greater unity to theoretical physics in one or other, or all, of senses (1) to (8): all successive theories have increasingly successfully exemplified and given precision to physicalismto an extent which cannot be said of any rival metaphysical thesis, at that level of generality. The whole way theoretical physics has developed points towards physicalism, in other words, as the goal towards which physics has developed. Furthermore, what it means to say this is given precision by the account of theoretical unity given in section 5.3 above.

In assessing the relative fruitfulness of two rival metaphysical theses, M a and M b , for some phase in the development of theoretical physics that involves the successive acceptance of theories T 1 , T 2 ,  T n , two considerations need to be born in mind. First, how potentially fruitful are M a and M b , how specific or precise, and thus how specific in the guidelines offered for the development of new theories? Second, how actually fruitful are M a and M b , in the sense of how successful or unsuccessful has the succession of theories, T 1 , T 2 ,  T n , been when regarded as a research programme with M a or M b as its key idea? When both considerations are taken into account, physicalism(8) comes out as more fruitful for theoretical physics from Newton to today than any rival thesis (at its level of generality). Physicalismis not as specific as physicalism, and thus not as potentially fruitful; it does not do justice to the way GR absorbs the force of gravitation into the nature of space-time, and does not do justice to current research programmes which seek to unify matter and space-time. (All of physicalism(n), n = 1, 2,  7, are scientifically fruitful to some extent, but decreasingly so as n goes down from 7 to 6  to 1, in view of the decreasing specificity and content of these versions of physicalism.)