Chapter 4 solves the problem of what it means to say of a scientific theory that it is simple, unified or explanatory. This problem was recognized by, but Popper did not know how to solve it. Einstein recognized the problem too, but did not know how to solve it, either. It is one of the great successes of aim-oriented empiricism that it provides the means for the problem to be solved.

Chapter 5 gives a careful and more detailed argument in support of aim-oriented empiricism, attention being given to some of the difficulties that arise in connection with the view, and the argument in support of the view.

Chapter 6 compares and contrasts views about simplicity, unity, explanatory power or "beauty" associated with aim-oriented empiricism on the one hand, and a view put forward by James McAllister on the other hand (see his influential Beauty and Revolution in Science

Chapter 7 argues that aim-oriented empiricism succeeds in doing what Popper's falsificationism fails to do, namely solve the problem of induction.

Chapter 8 takes up a theme close to Popper's heart: the problems of interpreting quantum theory in a realist way-so that the theory can be understood to be about electrons, nuclei, atoms and other denizens of the quantum world, and is not doomed to be a mere instrument for the prediction of experimental results. I argue that probabilism is the key to solving the fundamental quantum mystery-the apparent capacity of quantum entities (electrons, atoms and so on) to behave both as particles and waves. Probabilism, here, is the doctrine that nature herself is probabilistic. What exists at one moment may only determine what exists next probabilistically, and not deterministically. This develops basic ideas of Popper about quantum theory, but in ways of which he strongly disapproved.

Chapter 9 criticizes specialism, the doctrine that academic inquiry quite properly consists of a great number of specialized disciplines, only specialized intellectual standards being worthwhile. This is opposed by the view that academic inquiry must engage in sustained exploration of fundamental problems that cut across disciplinary boundaries, this exploration being undertaken in a way that influences, and is influenced by, specialized research. This is an improvement of anti-specialist remarks scattered throughout Popper's works.

Chapter 10 argues that Popper's The Logic of Scientific Discovery and The Open Society and Its Enemies, taken together, constitute a major development of the Enlightenment programme of learning from scientific progress how to achieve social progress towards a more enlightened world. But what Popper has to say is not the last word on the subject. Popper's version of the Enlightenment programme needs further improvement, partly because Popper's conception of scientific method needs to be improved, but mainly because, in order to implement the programme, we need to apply scientific method, not to social science, but to the social world itself. How and why Popper's version of the Enlightenment programme needs to be improved is outlined in this chapter. During Popper's early childhood, his parents were prosperous. They lived in a large apartment in an eighteenth-century house in the centre of Vienna, where Popper's father conducted his legal practice. Popper's father had an enormous library, which included many works of philosophy; books were everywhere, Popper tells us, except in the dining room, where stood a concert grand piano.

As a young boy, Popper was much concerned with the poverty he saw all around him in Vienna. In his autobiography, Popper recounts an early brush with philosophy. His father had suggested he read some volumes of August Strindberg's autobiography. Finding that Strindberg gave much too much importance to words and their meanings, Popper tried to point this out to his father, and was surprised to discover that he did not agree. Popper later saw this as his first brush with a lifelong battle to combat the influential view that philosophy must concern itself with analysis of meaning.

Popper left school at 16 because of the tedium of the classes, and enrolled at the University of Vienna, initially as a non-matriculated student. Four years later, at the second attempt, he passed the exam to become a matriculated student. Any student could take any lecture course, and, initially, Popper sampled lectures in a wide range of subjects-history, literature, psychology, philosophy-before concentrating on physics and mathematics. In these fields Popper had excellent, if remote and autocratic, teachers: Hans Thirring, Wilhelm Wirtinger, Philipp Furtwängler and Hans Hahn. Later, Popper devoted himself to the study of the psychology of thinking, influenced by Karl Bühler and the writings of Otto Selz.

The First World War and its aftermath brought dramatic changes to conditions of life in Vienna. Popper's father lost much of his savings. Popper left home and moved into part of a disused military hospital converted by students into a primitive students' home, and joined socialist groups seeking political change. For a time, Popper thought of himself as a communist. But then, on 15 June 1919, an event occurred which Popper was later to describe as one of the most important in his life; it caused him to become critical of communism and Marxism, and, years later, led to the writing of his The Open Society and Its Enemies. The communists organized a demonstration with the intention of freeing communists held in a police station in Vienna. The police opened fire, and some of the demonstrators were killed. Popper was deeply shocked, and even felt some personal responsibility for the tragedy, in that he had endorsed a doctrine, Marxism, which required that there should be just such incidents, so that the struggle to overcome capitalism might be intensified. was aware of Popper's low opinion of Wittgenstein). 1 Nevertheless, Popper did attend, and give papers at, a number of fringe seminars, and his work was strongly influenced by, but also critical of, the doctrines of the Circle.