But if discovery is not rational, it becomes miraculous that good new theories are ever discovered. Scientific progress becomes all but inexplicable. AOE, by contrast, provides physics with a rational, if fallible and non-mechanical, method for the discovery of new fundamental physical theories. This method involves modifying the current best level 3 blueprint so that:

(a) the new blueprint exemplifies physicalism better than its predecessor; (b) the new blueprint promises, when made sufficiently precise to become a testable theory, to unify clashes between predecessor theories; (c) the new theory promises to exemplify the new blueprint better than the predecessor theories exemplify the predecessor blueprint.

(a), (b) and (c) provide means for assessing how good an idea for a new theory is which do not involve empirical testing (which is brought in once the new theory has been formulated). The level 4 thesis of physicalism provides continuity between the state of knowledge before the discovery of the new theory, and the state of knowledge after this discovery. Modifying the current level 3 blueprint ensures that the new theory will be incompatible with its predecessors; it will postulate new kinds of entities, forces, space-time structure, and will exhibit new symmetries. In other words, because of the hierarchical structure of AOE, there is (across revolutions) both continuity (at level 4) and discontinuity (at levels 2 and 3), something that is not possible given falsificationism. AOE provides physics with specific non-empirical tasks to perform, specific non-empirical problems to be solved, and non-empirical methods for the assessment of ideas for new theories, all of which adds up to a rational, if fallible, method of discovery. It all stems from recognizing that physicalism is a part of current scientific knowledge. The discovery of new fundamental physical theories then ceases to be inexplicable. None of this is possible granted falsificationism.The fact that AOE is able to provide a rational method of discovery, while falsificationism is not, is due to the greater rigour of AOE (a point mentioned in 3 above). AOE has greater rigour because AOE acknowledges, while falsificationism denies, metaphysical assumptions implicit in persistent scientific preference for simple, explanatory theories. It is precisely the explicit acknowledgement of these metaphysical assumptions which makes the rational method of discovery of AOE possible.

9. Diversity of scientific method. One striking feature of natural science, often commented on, is that different branches of the natural sciences have somewhat different methods. Experimental and observational methods, and methods or principles employed in constructing and assessing theories, vary as one moves from theoretical to phenomenological physics, from physics to chemistry, from astronomy to biology, from geology to ethology. Falsificationism can hardly do justice to this striking diversity of method within the natural sciences. Popper, indeed, tends to argue that there is unity of method, not only in natural science, but across the whole of science, including social science as well (seeAOE, by contrast, predicts diversity of method throughout natural science, overlaid by unity of method at a metamethodological level. AOE can do justice to the diversity of methods to be found in diverse sciences, without underlying unity and rationality being sacrificed.

It is important to appreciate, first, that different branches of the natural sciences are not isolated from one another: they form an interconnected whole, from theoretical physics to molecular biology, neurology and the study of animal behaviour. Different branches of natural science, even different branches of a single science such as physics, chemistry or biology, have, at some level of specificity, different aims, and hence different methods. But at some level of generality all these branches of natural science have a common aim, and therefore common methods: to improve knowledge and understanding of the natural world. All (more or less explicitly) put AOE into practice, but because different scientific specialities have different specific aims,at the lower end of the hierarchy of methods different specialities have somewhat different methods, even though some more general methods are common to all the sciences. Furthermore, all natural sciences apart from theoretical physics presuppose and use results from other scientific specialities, as when chemistry presupposes atomic theory and quantum theory, and biology presupposes chemistry. The results of one science become a part of the presuppositions of another, implicit in the aims of the other science (equivalent to the level 3 blueprint of physics, or the level 4 thesis of physicalism). This further enhances unity throughout diversity, and helps explain the need for diversity of method.

A key feature of AOE is that methods depend somewhat on aims, methods varying somewhat as aims vary. When the hierarchical structure of aims and methods of AOE, depicted in1, is applied to specific branches of natural science-geology, evolutionary biology, neuroscience, organic chemistry-the various spherical discs of1 will need to be reinterpreted so that they come to represent the different more or less specific aims of the various branches of natural science. What the various discs of the figure depict will vary as we move from geology to neuroscience and so on-even the number of levels required will vary. What remains constant throughout all these diverse applications of AOE, however, is the hierarchical structure of aims and methods, aims becoming increasingly insubstantial and unproblematic as one goes up the hierarchy in each case.