pp. 252-4), despite explicit disavowals elsewhere (seeHe fails, however, to emphasize that critical rationalism requires that we explicitly articulate these metaphysical presuppositions, so that they may be criticized, and thus, we may hope, improved, as an integral part of science, so that the methods of science may be improved with our improving knowledge. Just this way of doing science was instigated by Einstein in developing the special and general theories of relativity, as we saw in Chapter 3. The invariance and symmetry principles of modern physics-which can be interpreted as either methodological or metaphysical principles-are a development of Einstein's profound innovation. However, modern physics, and modern science quite generally, fail to put into practice, explicitly and fully, Einstein's way of doing science, in that they fail to articulate and criticize actual and possible aims and methods-or philosophies of science-as an integral part of science itself. The institutional reorganization that this requires-namely philosophy of science pursued as an integral part of science itself-has not been carried out. This is of course in part due to the fact that the scientific community accepts Popper's falsificationist demarcation criterion for dividing off science from non-science. Views about what ought to be the aims and methods of science-philosophies of science-not being themselves testable theories in any straightforward sense, have no place in science itself according to traditional, and Popperian, empiricism.

Thus scientific integrity at present demands that discussion of aims and methods be excluded from science, instead of demanding that this discussion constitutes an integral part of science (as required by aim-oriented empiricism or universalism). At present, by and large, science departments and departments of history and philosophy of science do not speak to each other (although in recent years a bit of dialogue has been instigated). To this extent Popper, rather than Einstein, is institutionalized. This institutionalization of Popperian methodology prevents us from developing a genuinely rational, fundamentalist science. 34. For Einstein's advocacy of universalism see, for example, EinsteinSee also Chapter 3 of the present book. 35. See note 16. 36. It should be noted that the basic objection to Kuhn's prescription for science applies with almost equal force to Lakatos's prescription as outlined in hisLakatos's problem is to reconcile the dogmatism of Kuhn's normal science, on the one hand, with the anti-dogmatic, critical falsificationism of Popper, on the other hand, taking into account especially Feyerabend's important point that in order to test a given theory severely, we need to possess, and even develop, alternative theories (see). Lakatos's solution is to prescribe for science simultaneous competing fragments of Kuhnian normal science-competing research programmes-thus doing justice simultaneously to Kuhnian dogmatism and Feyerabendian pluralism. Lakatos makes it abundantly clear, however, that ultimately only relative empirical success ought to decide the fate of research programmes within science. There is thus no essential role, within Lakatos's conception of science, for sustained critical development of our best metaphysical answer to the problem "What kind of world is this?", so that the hard cores of research programmes could be assessed in part in terms of this answer. Lakatos advocates a kind of competitive specialism. In terms of our obstacle-course analogy, Lakatos sees science as a number of competing individuals, with different routes in mind, stumbling blindly from A to B. 37. For a powerful criticism of the idea that the social sciences should be value-neutral, seeEssentially the same point is made by, when he argues that economic thinking must reflect or presuppose some philosophy of life, some view as to what is of value in life. For the point that explicit articulation and criticism of value assumptions implicit in the aims of research is actually essential for the whole of science if it is to be objective and rational, seeValues are even implicit, it should be noted, in the aims of a science as apparently remote from ordinary life as pure theoretical physics. The question "What kind of world is this?", may be interpreted in such a fashion that merely developing theories, like quantum theory, which predict more and more phenomena more and more accurately constitutes satisfactory progress towards answering the question. Einstein asked for much more from theoretical physics: he sought to capture, in a "wildly speculative way" the "thoughts of God". He did not know that the universe has a coherent, unified structure; rather, the mere possibility of discovering such a structure seemed to him to be of such supreme value that to abandon the search for it seemed to be a profound betrayal of the noblest aspirations of theoretical physics. Thus Einstein's judgement that quantum theory is unsatisfactory, in that it abandons microrealism, was in part based on a value judgement. (For an endorsement of Einstein's judgement on this point see; see also Chapter 8 of the present book.) 38. A number of writers-for example,