

Perhaps most crucially of all, the overall organization, the institutional structure, of scientific, academic inquiry exemplifies specialism rather than universalism. Universities are split up into relatively autonomous faculties: for example, faculties of physical sciences, biological sciences, technology, medicine, humanities or arts. Each faculty is subdivided into a number of relatively autonomous departments corresponding roughly to distinct academic disciplines. On the intellectual level, however, the subdivisions proceed further: each discipline is subdivided into a number of sub-disciplines; a specialist whose field of expertise lies within such a sub-discipline may not even be able to communicate properly-let alone share problems-with colleagues working within the same discipline. Such an expert will communicate almost exclusively with his fellow specialists scattered throughout the world-thus participating in what has been called an "invisible college"The striking point to note about all this is that nowhere is any provision made whatsoever for sustained, explicit, influential discussion of fundamental problems. This does not exist at the level of individual universities; nor does it exist at the level of published intellectual discussion, at the level of "invisible colleges".Scientific, academic inquiry is, in other words, organized overwhelmingly in accordance with the intellectual standards of specialism. And recently, this drive towards more and more specialized research has become much, much worse as a result of the pressures academics are under to publish, or perish.

All this has dire intellectual consequences-especially, of course, if viewed from the perspective of universalism. The remorseless concern to solve exclusively specialist problems for their own sake; the proliferation of specialized disciplines (disciplines within disciplines, the autonomy of each jealously guarded); the accumulation of specialized results and vocabulary; increasingly specialized education (specialist indoctrination); the absence of informed, critical, non-technical discussion of fundamental issues-all these factors combine to make it overwhelmingly difficult for anyone to discover, understand and use the fundamentalist implications of specialized results. Intellectual inquiry becomes increasingly fragmented and incoherent, increasingly unusable from the standpoint of helping us to improve our answers to the four fundamental questions.

That over-specialization can have undesirable consequences has, it is true, been rather widely recognized. This scarcely amounts, however, to a recognition of the inadequacy of specialism. For if we look at what has been done in an attempt to compensate for fragmentation brought about by over-specialization, we find that new interdisciplinary subjects have been created, subjects such as biophysics, biochemistry, mathematical logic, industrial sociology. This typically specialist way of attempting to solve the problem actually, in many ways, serves only to make it worse. In seeking to facilitate communication between disciplines, additional buffer disciplines are created which only have the effect of further obstructing interdisciplinary communication. Thus even those who seek to combat some of the bad consequences of specialism can only adopt specialist methods in seeking to do so-so powerful a hold does specialism exercise over the academic mind-the end result being in consequence the exact opposite of what was originally intended. What cannot be done, of course, is what is needed most: the development of a tradition of influential, informal discussion of fundamental problems, feeding into, and being fed by, diverse specialist discussion. This obvious solution cannot be adopted for the simple reason that it involves violating specialist intellectual standards! A further powerful indication of the increasing predominance of specialism over universalism is provided by the way in which academic philosophy has developed in recent times. Increasingly, academic philosophers have been concerned to develop philosophy as an academically respectable specialized discipline, with its own particular problems and methods, existing alongside other academic disciplines.

For the vast majority of academic philosophers, progress in philosophy is to be achieved by pinpointing and solving technical problems mainly conceived as problems of "conceptual confusion" requiring "conceptual analysis".Universalism, of course, becomes quite impossible if "philosophy" is pursued in this specialized way. For universalism requires the existence of the Enlightenment conception of philosophy: philosophy conceived as the open, non-professional, unspecialized discussion of fundamental problems, influencing and being influenced by specialized problem solving in all other scientific, academic disciplines. In seeking to develop academically respectable, professional, specialized philosophy, academic philosophers have sabotaged almost all possibility of developing intellectual inquiry in critical fundamentalist directions.

Consider the following specialist account of the way in which intellectual inquiry has developed over the centuries.

Intellectual inquiry begins with myth, religion and philosophy. Originally, philosophy (or perhaps theology or metaphysics) is the queen of the sciences, other intellectual disciplines having only a highly subservient, specialized role to play within philosophy. This state of affairs exists in the thought of ancient Greece, in the thought of mediaeval Europe, and, to some extent, in the thought of seventeenth-century Europe during the so-called scientific revolution. For Kepler, Galileo, Bacon, Descartes, Newton, Spinoza and Leibniz, philosophy and theology represented the primary, central disciplines-so much so that science was known as "natural" or "experimental" philosophy. Gradually, however, successive disciplines emerged out of philosophy, dissociating themselves from the parent discipline of philosophy, intellectual success and progress being essentially bound up with this long process of dissociation. Over the centuries philosophy has given birth to the autonomous disciplines of mathematics, astronomy, physics, logic, biology, history, political science, sociology, psychology, cosmology, linguistics (the last three or four only having become autonomous in the twentieth century). As a result of having bred these autonomous disciplines, philosophy itself has been left in a highly impoverished state. The nature and status of philosophy, in other words, have changed dramatically. Instead of being the queen of the sciences, overarching all other sciences, philosophy has been transformed into a highly specialized, technical, somewhat meagre enterprise, concerned not with improving our knowledge and understanding of the world-for that is the business of the empirical sciences-but rather with clarifying concepts and solving conceptual problems. In line with the general trend, academic philosophy seeks to transform itself into a specialized discipline, dissociated from "philosophy" in the original sense of Plato, Spinoza, Leibniz, Diderot, Voltaire, Hume or Kant.