1 gives an indication of the way in which specialized academic disciplines may be conceived, in critical fundamentalist terms, as being designed to help us solve the above four basic problems. As the figure indicates, it is essential for the intellectual integrity and rationality of intellectual inquiry as a whole that there be a constant two-way flow of information between specialized problem solving and fundamental problem solving.

A major feature of specio-universalism, as depicted in1, is that philosophy is quite different from all the other disciplines of academic inquiry-physics, history, anthropology, sociology and the rest. It is not a specialized discipline at all. It has, as its primary task, to engage in rational, that is, imaginative and critical, thinking about our fundamental problems, intellectual and practical. Philosophy, so conceived, is not the exclusive preserve of trained, expert, academic philosophers; everyone is encouraged to do a bit of philosophy, to engage in a bit of thinking about fundamental problems-academics and non-academics, five-year-olds and ninety-five-year-olds. In so far as there are professional, academic philosophers, their basic job is to encourage non-philosophers, anyone and everyone, to do a bit of philosophical pondering. No professional How can our human world exist and best flourish embedded as it is in the physical universe?

Imaginative and critical thinking about fundamental problems

Our Fundamental Problem

Two-way flow of problems and ideas for solutions between specialized, technical problem solving, and informal rational proposing and criticizing of possible solutions to our fundamental problems.

Specialized research

(1) What kind of world is this?

(2) How do we fit in, and how did we come to be?

(3) What is of most value in life and how is it to be realized?

(4) How can we best make progress towards as good a world as possible?

In te rn at io na l Af fa irs

qualifications are required to make a contribution to philosophy. All that matters is the quality of the contribution, not the academic status or qualifications of the contributor. Philosophy is open to everyone, but seeks to highlight the best of the contributions that have been made over time.

Philosophy differs from other academic disciplines, not only in being open to everyone (the qualified and the unqualified), not only in everyone being encouraged to participate, but also in its relationship to other disciplines, and to other aspects of life. In order to fulfil its vital role of ensuring that all four elementary rules of rational problem solving are implemented by academic inquiry, philosophy must ensure that there is a two-way interaction between specialized problem solving in all the specialized disciplines and the sustained attempts to solve the four fundamental problems of the whole endeavour. Philosophy, according to this view, constantly gives rise to new specialized problems, and is itself profoundly influenced by our success and failure in seeking to solve specialized problems. In so far as professional, academic philosophers do need to have a qualification, it is in order to have an expert knowledge and understanding of one or more specialized fields of study, so that they may actively participate in ensuring that fundamental and specialized problem solving interact with one another.

In the end, of course, it does not matter what we call those academics who actively ensure that academia keeps thinking about our fundamental problems, and thus implements all four basic rules of problem solving, as long as the job gets done. There are, however, historical grounds for holding that it is the proper job of philosophy to do it. Once upon a time, in the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, philosophers instinctively sought to solve fundamental problems-and even tackled specialized problems of science and mathematics as well. This is true, for example, of Descartes and Leibniz; and thinkers we now regard as scientists, such as Galileo or Newton, did not hesitate to tackle fundamental philosophical problems. Since then, however, academic philosophy has dwindled in scope and significance until, in the twentieth century, it reached its nadir of specialized triviality in the form of Oxford, linguistic or analytic philosophy, or of bombastic, anti-scientific obscurity in the form of so-called "Continental" philosophy.If academic philosophy is to take on the role that speciouniversalism assigns to it, then it must be radically reformed. A revolution in philosophy is required. As it is, academic philosophy has become so much an esoteric, irrelevant speciality that even those all too aware of the failure of academia to keep alive thinking about fundamental problems that cut across all disciplinary boundaries never think to blame philosophy for this situation. And yet that is where the blame lies. Philosophy has abandoned its proper responsibility to keep alive, at the heart of academia, sustained, influential thinking about what our fundamental problems are, and how they are to be solved. The situation has become so bad that scarcely anyone thinks that that is what philosophy ought to be doing. 8 And the result is astonishingly damaging. It means that academia fails to put rules (a) and (b) into practice and, as a result, fails to put rule (d) into practice as well. Rule (c) is implemented splendidly. As we shall see, academia today is an intricate maze of ever more specialized research. But, disastrously, rules (a), (b) and (d) are violated. As a result of the retreat of philosophy into specialized triviality, three of the four most elementary rules of rational problem solving are violated in a wholesale, structural way, by academia today-and this has very damaging consequences for our world, as we shall see.