

Popper has also vehemently criticized specialization in such remarks as, "Specialization may be a great temptation for the scientist. For the philosopher it is the mortal sin"; and "If the many, the specialists, gain the day, it will be the end of science as we know it-of great science. It will be a spiritual catastrophe comparable in its consequences to nuclear armament". So vehement was Popper's condemnation of specialization that he failed to see its value, indeed its necessity-and failed to see how the damaging irrationality of specialism can be overcome by implementing rule (d) of the four rules of rational problem solving I formulated in section 9.2. For a more detailed criticism of academic philosophy, on the grounds that it fails to keep alive rational tackling of fundamental problems-and fails to solve two key philosophical problems as a result-see Maxwell (2017b, chs. 3 and 4). 23. Something like this account is presupposed, or propounded, by G.ch. 1, pp. 1-18) and Whiteley (1955, pp. 5-6). 24. An amusing indication of this is the way in which philosophers tend to acknowledge, apologetically or critically, that philosophy still concerns itself with the problems discussed by, for example, Plato, whereas other disciplines successfully solve initial problems and move on to new problems, thus making progress. The failure of philosophy to progress in this way is only problematic if philosophy is conceived in specialist terms. From the standpoint of the fundamentalist or Enlightenment conception of philosophy, it is of course precisely the basic task of philosophy to keep alive, throughout the whole of intellectual inquiry, and throughout our culture and social life, a sustained concern with our four fundamental problems. 25. Since the first version of this chapter was published, in 1980, some academics have become concerned that members of the public should contribute to discussion concerning science policy options. Thus, in the UK, the Royal Society produced a report on the future of nanotechnology, the result of a collaboration of scientists and non-scientists. The Economic and Social Research Council has funded a research programme, Science in Society, which has explored issues having to do with public engagement with science. There is a rather general recognition that communication between science and the public should go in both directions. It is not good enough for scientists merely to inform the public about science. These developments do not, however, amount to academia as a whole engaging with the social world in a two-way discussion about how our problems of living are to be tackled in increasingly cooperatively rational ways. 26. It is this feature of universalism which led me to suggest the view should really be called "specio-universalism" (see note 1). 27. Failure to put universalism into practice has, as a consequence, that sustained discussion of our fundamental global problems does not take place in a way that can influence the priorities of scientific research. As a result, research devoted to such matters as halting global warming, or alleviating global poverty, and the diseases of the global poor, is neglected, in favour of research funded by, and devoted to the interests of, the military, government, industry and commerce. 28. For a more detailed and sophisticated advocacy of this critical fundamentalist conception of science, see Chapters 2 and 5, and. For a critical assessment, seeand my replyand my reply. For more recent expositions see Maxwell). 29. Contrast Russell's uncritical or inflexible "postulational" approach with the critical, flexible postulationism of aim-oriented empiricism, which stresses that science, in order to be rational, must continuously articulate, develop and criticize metaphysical blueprints for science as an integral part of scientific inquiry, and in the light of ostensible scientific progress, thus enabling us to improve our aims and methods as our scientific knowledge and understanding of the world improves. 30.. 31. See note 28. 32. This important point can be established quite simply as follows. Science is centrally concerned to solve the problem "What kind of world is this?" If science is to tackle this problem rationally, priority needs to be given to proposing and critically assessing possible solutions-thus developing a tradition of rational cosmology like that represented, for example, by Popper in his "Back to the Presocratics"