). An upholder of aim-oriented rationalism and the philosophy of wisdom would wish to make only minor adjustments to Hume's thesis. Either reason should be held to be the slave of that most profound passion of ours of all to participate in life of value; or reason ought perhaps to be called the "good servant" or "enlightened tutor" of the passions-reason itself the outcome of our cooperative, balancing, or resolving, of our passion for a whole, authentic life of value. As a result of conceiving of inquiry and reason as being an essential, active component of human life, more or less realized in practice in our personal and social actions, I am led to avoid the conceptual incoherence of Popper's three-world view, as indicated in notes 11 and 44, and in this note above. In general, the viewpoint that I wish to advocate is much closer to Einstein's than to Popper's, taking into account especially the emphasis that Einstein came to place in his later life on the fundamental importance of developing a living ethical culture, and a kind of education designed to help us acquire and participate in such a culture:

It is not enough to teach a man a speciality. Through it he may become a kind of useful machine but not a harmoniously developed personality. It is essential that the student acquire an understanding of and a lively feeling for values. He must acquire a vivid sense of the beautiful and of the morally good. Otherwise he-with his specialized knowledgemore closely resembles a well-trained dog than a harmoniously developed person. He must learn to understand the motives of human beings, their illusions, and their sufferings in order to acquire a proper relationship to individual fellow-men and to the community. (Einstein, "Education for Independent46. See Isaac Bashevis

47. It is doubtless commitment to this kind of oracular conception of reason which leads both

Kuhn and Feyerabend, in their rather different ways, to characterize science as irrational. The same mistake is implicit in almost all forms of relativism. 48. In this chapter I am of course arguing that even though the goal is difficult to attain, nevertheless it is a matter of supreme importance that we seek to build universalism, rather than specialism, into the institutional structure of the scientific, academic enterprise, and education. Indeed what I am proposing goes much further than this. We need to build universalism, and aim-oriented rationalism, into our whole way of life, into society as a whole, into the human world. The basic aim of intellectual inquiry ought to be to devote reason to the enhancement of wisdom. This programme can scarcely begin to be put into practice, however, as long as specialism rather than universalism is built into the institutional structure of the scientific, academic enterprise. 49. Seefor the suggestion that the aim of education should be the achievement of wisdom in life. Gray fails to point out, however, that intellectual inquiry is at present profoundly irrational and defective when judged from the standpoint of having as its basic aim to help us achieve wisdom. 50. For a detailed exposition and critical assessment of the two contrasting philosophies of inquiry of the philosophy of knowledge and the philosophy of wisdom, see. I have subsequently come to call these two contrasting philosophies of scientific and academic inquiry "knowledge-inquiry" and "wisdom-inquiry". In Maxwell (1984a or 2007) I expound in detail the two views, and argue that knowledge-inquiry prevails in academia, despite its damaging irrationality, and despite the clearly articulated, more rigorous and humanly valuable alternative of wisdom-inquiry. This situation has not changed much since 1984, or 2007. Both knowledge-inquiry and wisdom-inquiry can be taken to hold that the basic aim of inquiry is to help promote human welfare by means of research and education. Knowledge-inquiry holds that this is to be done by, in the first instance, the acquisition of knowledge. First, knowledge is to be acquired; once acquired, it can be applied to help solve social problems. The pursuit of knowledge must be decisively shielded from potentially corrupting influences of the social world, otherwise authentic, objective factual knowledge will degenerate into mere propaganda and dogma, and will cease to be of human value. Wisdom-inquiry holds that the four elementary rules of rational problem solving of section 9.2 need to be put into practice. Priority needs to be given to the tasks of (a) articulating, and improving the articulation of, problems of living, and (b) proposing and critically assessing possible solutions, possible actions, policies, political programmes, ways of living, philosophies of life. Problems of knowledge are subordinate to problems of living. Wisdom-inquiry puts specio-universalism into practice, whereas knowledge-inquiry is a version of specialism (in that it dissociates problems of knowledge from more fundamental problems of living). not directly influence nature). Again, causal explanations of natural phenomena enable us to manipulate nature so that it comes to serve our ends; analogous knowledge of social phenomena would provide the means to manipulate people. Some manipulation may be necessary, even desirable, in certain contexts, but this should not be the primary way we interact with one another. Yet again, and reinforcing this point, the kind of knowledge and understanding we should seek to acquire of people differs profoundly from that acquired by natural science: within social inquiry, primacy should be given to what I have called "personalistic understanding" (and others have called empathic understanding or "theory of mind"): see note 19 and associated texts. Our capacity to acquire personalistic understanding of each other is absolutely essential for our humanity, for cooperative action, for friendship, and love; the open society is inconceivable without it. And yet nothing like personalistic understanding of nature arises within natural science-apart from that element of it that is relevant for the understanding of sentient animals. There are no legal or moral constraints on "torturing nature to reveal her secrets" in experiments (as seventeenth-century natural philosophers put it); there are such constraints when it comes to the human world. Finally, we may well hold, with Popper, that the social sciences and the humanities, even when restricted to improving knowledge and understanding of the social world, should nevertheless be pursued in such a way as to aid the promotion of the open society, for example, in seeking to acquire knowledge of human suffering, or in seeking to assess the success and failure of policies and political programmes. But the moment social science is given this role of acquiring knowledge relevant to the promotion of the open society, it becomes distinct from natural science. Nature has nothing comparable to our struggle to make progress towards a more open or enlightened world, and that suffices to distinguish natural and social science. For all these reasons, social inquiry, even when restricted to the pursuit of knowledge, must differ radically from natural science. In this section (section 10.4), I have taken this argument much further. The primary task of social inquiry and the humanities, I have argued, is to help promote the open society-or, as I have put it, the cooperatively rational society. Social inquiry and the humanities should indeed seek to improve our knowledge and understanding of aspects of the social world; but their primary task is to promote cooperatively rational tackling of problems of living. Social inquiry is primarily social methodology or social philosophy, and only secondarily devoted to the pursuit of knowledge. 21. Given any accepted scientific theory, whether Newtonian theory, general relativity, quantum theory or the standard model, endlessly many rival theories can be concocted in each case that are even more falsifiable, better corroborated but, if anything, even more seriously ad hoc (i.e. lacking in simplicity) than the accepted theory, in the following way. Taking Newtonian theory (NT) as an example of an accepted theory, here are two examples of grossly ad hoc rival theories. NT*: "Everything occurs as NT asserts, until the first second of the year 2100, when an inverse cube law of gravitation will abruptly hold." NT**: "Everything occurs as NT asserts, except for systems consisting of gold spheres, each having a mass of 1,000 tons, interacting with each other gravitationally in outer space, in a vacuum, within a spherical region of 10 miles: for these systems, Newton's law of gravitation is repulsive, not attractive." It is easy to see that there are infinitely many such rivals to NT, all just as empirically successful (at the moment) as NT. The predictions of NT may be represented as points in a multidimensional space, each point corresponding to some specific kind of system (there being infinitely many points). NT has only been corroborated for a minute region of this space. In order to concoct a (grossly ad hoc) rival to NT, just as well corroborated as NT, all we need do is identify some region in this space that includes no prediction of NT that has been verified, and then modify the laws of NT arbitrarily, for just that identified region. Rival theories, of the above type, can easily be concocted that satisfy falsificationist requirements for being more acceptable than NT. NT, like most accepted physical theories, yields predictions that clash with observation or experiment, and thus are ostensibly falsified. We can always concoct new theories, in the way just indicated, doctored to yield the "correct" predictions. We can add on independently testable auxiliary postulates, thus ensuring that the new theory has greater empirical content than the old one. And no doubt this excess content will be corroborated. For further examples and discussion, see previous chapters, and