

The first thing that needs to be said in response to this is that, as I have already emphasized, there is no question of justifying the truth (to some degree of certainty or probability) of any of the theses at levels 3 to 7. These theses remain, throughout, pure conjectures. I concur with Popper's thesis that all our knowledge is ultimately conjectural. (Whether such a view can claim to be the solution to the problem of induction is an issue I will take up below.) At most, then, there is a justification for accepting such and such a thesis as a part of (conjectural) scientific knowledge, or preferring thesis A to thesis B. Second, the top thesis is accepted on grounds which have nothing to do with the success of science at all. It is accepted because its truth is a necessary precondition for the acquisition of knowledge to be possible at all.

The thesis at level 7 asserts that the universe is such that it is possible for us to acquire some knowledge of our local circumstances (sufficient for it to be possible for us to continue to live). We are justified in accepting this thesis entirely in the absence of any justification for its truth (or probable truth), just because we have nothing to lose; accepting this thesis as a part of our knowledge can only help, and cannot obstruct, the task of acquiring knowledge whatever the universe is like (see

This elementary argument for permanently accepting this level 7 thesis can of course be challenged. What is beyond question, however, is that no circularity is involved here at all. The argument in support of accepting the level 7 thesis makes no appeal to the success of science whatsoever. Science is not even mentioned.

I might add that a part of the point of exhibiting the metaphysical assumptions of science in the form of a hierarchy, from level 3 to 7, is to overcome a fatal objection to one traditional approach to solving the problem of induction, versions of which have been argued for by, for example,. This argues that we are rationally entitled to assume that there are sufficient regularities in nature for the inductive methods of science to meet with success because, if such regularities do not exist, no method will procure knowledge. But this argument tries to establish too much; it is not valid. Counterexamples can be imagined. The world might be such that "the inductive methods of science" meet with no success at all, and yet we can still acquire sufficient knowledge to live. Natural phenomena might be governed by gods: in order to get nature to do what we want it to do, we might need to make sacrifices, or pray. (For further suggestions along these lines, see.) The thesis of AOE, at level 7, might be called a "principle of uniformity", but it is very much weaker than the assertion that there are regularities such that "the inductive methods of science" meet with success. The fatal objection to the Reichenbach-BraithwaiteMellor (RBM) approach is that (1) either it seeks to justify acceptance of a "principle of regularity" which, if accepted, suffices to justify science, but the argument is invalid; or (2) it is valid, but the "principle of regularity or uniformity" whose acceptance is justified is much too weak to justify science. AOE adopts (2), and recognizes that the acceptance of other, more restrictive "principles of uniformity" needs to be justified on other grounds; RBM, not acknowledging the hierarchy of principles, are doomed to opt for (1). There is another, related objection to RBM: "the inductive methods of science", at least as conceived of by RBM, are not the best available. They do not have the flexibility of the methods of AOE, which allow for the possibility of methods (associated with theses low down in the hierarchy) being improved in the light of improving knowledge, feedback being facilitated by the hierarchical structure of AOE between improving knowledge and improving knowledge-abouthow-to-improve-knowledge (i.e. improving aims and methods). The traditional "inductive methods of science", as a result of their inflexibility, are both too restrictive, and not restrictive enough. Like most other traditional attempts at solving the problem of induction, RBM try to justify the unrigorous, and thus the unjustifiable. The status quo needs to be changed, improved, not justified.

What about the thesis of "meta-knowability" at level 6? Here are two arguments for accepting meta-knowability which make no appeal whatsoever to the success of AOE science.

(i) Granted that there is some kind of general feature of the universe which makes it possible to acquire knowledge of our local environment (as guaranteed by the thesis at level 7), it is reasonable to suppose that we do not know all that there is to be known about what the nature of this general feature is. It is reasonable to suppose, in other words, that we can improve our knowledge about the nature of this general feature, thus improving methods for the improvement of knowledge. Not to suppose this is to assume, arrogantly, that we already know all that there is to be known about how to acquire new knowledge. Granted that learning is possible (as guaranteed by the level 7 thesis), it is reasonable to suppose that, as we learn more about the world, we will learn more about how to learn. Granted the level 7 thesis, in other words, metaknowability is a reasonable conjecture.