I argue, first, that persistent acceptance of (more or less) unified fundamental dynamic theories in physics, even though endlessly many empirically more successful disunified rivals are always available, means that physics makes a persistent untestable (or metaphysical) assumption about the nature of the universe: it is such that some yetto-be-discovered, more or less unified physical theory is true, and all seriously disunified theories are false. I then invoke the account of what it means to assert of a physical theory that it is unified, developed in the last chapter, to throw light on the question of what physics does, and ought to, assume in assuming that some more or less unified theory is true. This provides us with a way of classifying-indeed, of partially ordering-all metaphysical theses which assert that the universe possesses some kind of comprehensive, more or less disunified dynamic structure-the universe being more or less physically comprehensible, in other words.

At once the fundamental problem arises: how can physics choose between these infinitely many metaphysical theses-versions of physicalism, as I call them? Two considerations drive us in opposite directions. On the one hand, we ought to choose that version of physicalism most fruitful for promoting progress in theoretical physics, if true. On the other hand, we ought to choose that minimalist version of physicalism just sufficiently substantial to make physics possible, and thus least likely to be false.

I take these in turn. First, I spell out how the account of unity given in the last chapter provides the means for assessing the relative fruitfulness of rival versions of physicalism; I go on to specify that version of physicalism that is the most fruitful, given the history of physics up till today, and argue that physics should accept this version as its basic metaphysical assumption. Second, I consider the grounds for physics accepting the least substantial version of physicalism that makes physics possible. The problem of choosing between these conflicting considerations is solved by the hierarchical view of aim-oriented empiricism (AOE). This does justice to both apparently conflicting considerations-a strong argument in favour of AOE. In conclusion, I consider two versions of AOE, and indicate, briefly, how the circularity problem can be solved.

The title of this chapter is intended to be provocative. "Scientific metaphysics" sounds like a contradiction in terms in view of Popper's well-known demarcation criterion that rules that metaphysical theses, being unfalsifiable, are not scientific.But of course Popper's falsificationist conception of science, along with others, will be found to be defective precisely because of a failure to acknowledge the role that metaphysical assumptions play in science. Furthermore, as I have indicated, a framework will be developed which makes it possible to appraise (untestable) metaphysical theses empirically, in terms of their "empirical fruitfulness", or fruitfulness for the empirical research programme of theoretical physics. For physics to be rigorous, it will be argued, it is essential that metaphysical theses are acknowledged as key components of theoretical knowledge in physics, and are appraised empirically in terms of their "empirical fruitfulness". Once the conception of physics defended here is accepted, the title entirely loses its air of being self-contradictory.5.2 Intellectual rigour requires that metaphysical presuppositions be made explicit

Almost all views about science deny that science makes a substantial, persistent, metaphysical (i.e. untestable) assumption about the universe. This is true, for example, of logical positivism, inductivism, logical empiricism, hypothetico-deductivism, conventionalism, constructive empiricism, pragmatism, realism, Bayesianism, induction-to-the-bestexplanationism, and the views of Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos. All these views, diverse as they are in other respects, accept a thesis that may be called standard empiricism (SE): in science, theories are accepted on the basis of empirical success and failure, and on the basis of simplicity, unity or explanatoriness, but no substantial thesis about the world is accepted permanently by science, as a part of scientific knowledge, independently of empirical considerations. Both Kuhn and Lakatos maintain, it is true, that a "paradigm" or "hard core" may be accepted for a time as a key item of scientific knowledge independently of evidence, even against the evidence; both hold, however, that such a paradigm or hard core will eventually be rejected when an empirically more successful paradigm or hard core emerges. Both Kuhn and Lakatos take SE for granted.Recently, a new research industry has grown up in the philosophy of science, devoted to "the metaphysics of science". 7 It might be thought that here, SE is repudiated. It is not. SE is implicit in all the works referred to in note 7.

Thus, SE is widely, almost unthinkingly, taken for granted by scientists and non-scientists alike. SE is nevertheless untenable. This is established decisively by the following argument.

Whenever a fundamental physical theory is accepted as a part of theoretical scientific knowledge, there are always endlessly many rival theories which fit the available evidence just as well as the accepted theory. Consider, for example, Newtonian theory (NT). One rival theory asserts: everything occurs as NT asserts up until midnight tonight when, abruptly, an inverse cube law of gravitation comes into operation. A second rival asserts: everything occurs as NT asserts, except for the case of any two solid gold spheres, each having a mass of a thousand tons, moving in otherwise empty space up to a mile apart, in which case the spheres attract each other by means of an inverse cube law of gravitation. There is no limit to the number of rivals to NT that can be concocted in this way, each of which has all the predictive success of NT as far as observed phenomena are concerned but which makes different predictions for some as yet unobserved phenomena. 8 Such theories can even be concocted which are more empirically successful than NT, by arbitrarily modifying NT, in just this entirely ad hoc fashion, so that the theories yield correct predictions where NT does not, as in the case of the orbit of Mercury, for example (which very slightly conflicts with NT).