The revolutionary transition from closed to open society first occurred, according to Popper, with the "Great Generation" of ancient Athens in the fifth century BC. Those to be associated with the birth and affirmation of the open society include Pericles, Herodotus, Protagoras, Democritus, Alcidamas, Lycophron, Antisthenes and, above all, Socrates.

It is from Plato, especially, that we learn of Socrates' passionate scepticism, his searching criticism of current beliefs and ideals, his conviction that first one must acknowledge one's own ignorance before one could hope to acquire knowledge and wisdom. But Socrates, Popper argues, was ultimately betrayed by Plato. The greatest advocate of the open society became, in Plato's Republic, the spokesman for a return to a closed society. sense of facts and his sincere quest for the truth, his important contributions to historical studies and social science, his burning desire to help the oppressed. Nevertheless, Marx is one of the most dangerous enemies of the open society, his thought disastrously corrupted by its Hegelian inheritance.

In a well-known passage in Capital, Marx declared that Hegel "stands dialectics on its head; one must turn it the right way up again" (quoted inAnd in another passage, Marx declared: "It is not the consciousness of man that determines his existence-rather, it is his social existence that determines his consciousness" (quoted ibid., p. 89). Whereas, for Hegel, an idealist, history is the dialectical development of ideas, for Marx history is determined by the dialectical development of material processes, in particular those associated with the means of production. Distinct historical phases-pre-feudal, feudal, capitalistic, post-revolutionary socialistowe their existence to distinct phases in the means of production, and the social arrangements these phases generate. Each phase leads, as a result of inevitable dialectical processes, to its own destruction and the creation of the next phase. Thus capitalism concentrates wealth and ownership of the means of the production into fewer and fewer hands until, eventually, the workers unite, overthrow the capitalists and establish socialism. The historical processes of dialectical materialism work themselves out through class struggle; classes and the conflicts between them being determined by the means of production. It is the laws determining the evolution of the economic base that decide the path of history; ideas, democratic and legal institutions form an ideological superstructure, which reflects the economic base and the interests of the dominant class, but is powerless to influence the path of history. Marx condemned as "Utopian" those socialists who sought to bring about the revolution by means of political policies and plans. He held that the proper "scientific" approach to bringing about socialism is, first, to discover the dialectical laws governing the evolution of the economic base of society, and then to help this evolution along, in so far as this is possible, thus speeding up the coming of the final, inevitable socialist revolution.

Popper argues that a number of elements of Marxist thought are of value, if not taken too far. There is the idea that the social cannot be reduced to the psychological, sociology not being reducible to psychology. There is the thesis that much of history has been influenced by class struggle, and the idea that the means of production, economic circumstances, play an important role in influencing the development of other aspects of social and cultural life, even something as apparently remote from economic conditions as mathematics. Above all, there is the recognition and depiction of the appalling conditions of life of the poor in the unrestrained capitalist conditions of Marx's time, and the recognition, too, of the hypocrisy of much of the morality, the legal system and the politics of those times. Having described Marx's account of the working conditions of children as young as six years, Popper writes: "Such were the conditions of the working class even in 1863, when Marx was writing Capital; his burning protest against these crimes, which were then tolerated, and sometimes even defended, not only by professional economists but also by churchmen, will secure him forever a place among the liberators of mankind" (1966a, vol. 2, p. 122).

But these good points are, for Popper, more than counterbalanced by the dreadful defects, most of which stem from Marx's historicism, inherited from Hegel. For the central tenet of Marxism is the idea that the laws of dialectical materialism determine the evolution of the means of production, and this in turn determines the evolution of everything else, from class struggle to culture, religion, the law and politics. But this is manifestly false. For one thing, there is a two-way interaction between economic conditions and ideas; eliminate scientific and technological ideas, and the economy would collapse. For another, ideas can themselves influence the course of history, Marxism itself being an example. Historical predictions made by Marx, on the basis of his economic historicism, have been falsified by subsequent historical events. The Russian Revolution is, for example, entirely at odds with Marx's theory, as is the way in which the unrestricted capitalism of Marx's time has subsequently become both more economically successful and more just and humane as a result of diverse political interventions. Marx's economic historicism is not just false; it is pseudoscientific. Only for exceptionally simple systems, such as the solar system, is long-term prediction, based on scientific theory, possible. In the case of social systems, incredibly complex and open to the influence of a multitude of unpredictable factors, the idea that science should be able to deliver long-term predictions is hopelessly unwarranted. Marx's historicism leads him to turn good points into bad ones by exaggeration. "The history of all hitherto existing society is a history of class struggle" (quoted in Popper, 1966a, vol. 2, p. 111) is a good point if "all" is not taken too seriously, but as it stands is an oversimplification and exaggeration; it ignores, for example, power struggles within the ruling class. Again, Marx was surely right to see legal and political institutions of his time as being biased in the direction of the interests of the ruling classes; but he was wrong to condemn all legal and political institutions as inevitably having this function, as his economic historicism compelled him to do.