In one important respect, specio-universalism, as just characterized, needs to be qualified. It is quite wrong-it may be argued-to suggest that the enterprise of seeking to improve our answers to the above four fundamental questions is somehow exclusively the concern of intellectual inquiry. Literature, theatre, music, art, religion can all be interpreted as being concerned to illuminate our responses to these basic questionsespecially the last two questions. Our whole culture can, in other words, be conceived of in universalist terms as being designed, ideally, to help us to discover and create that which is of most value in life. In engaging in our work, in social and political activity, we should ideally-it may be argued-be seeking to develop improved answers in practice to the last two questions, in one way or another. Indeed, in our whole way of lifein our way of being on this earth-we give implicitly our actual answers to such questions, whether we are aware of this or not. And in so far as we seek to improve our lives, we seek to improve the actual answers that we give to these questions, in the fabric of our actions. Universalism, in short, needs to be conceived as a philosophy of life, a social philosophy, a philosophy of culture: universalism interpreted as a philosophy of intellectual inquiry is simply a fragment of all this.

Universalism, as just characterized, may seem at first sight to be a somewhat autocratic, doctrinaire position, in that it seems to determine for us what our problems are and how they should be conceived. For this reason, it may at first sight seem unacceptable. For do not our problemseven our "universal" or fundamental problems-change, quite legitimately, from circumstance to circumstance, from person to person, from culture to culture? Can we really ever know for certain what our fundamental problems are, how they should be conceived?It will I hope become clear, as the argument unfolds, that my basic purpose in this chapter is to depict-and argue for-a kind of intellectual inquiry specifically designed to offer us maximum help with discovering for ourselves, whoever we may be, what our own unique problems of living are, how we are to conceive of them, and how we are to set about resolving them. My claim is that intellectual inquiry, so designed, is universalism. It is intellectual inquiry so designed that it has the kind of intellectual-institutional structure depicted in1 above, according to which, problems and their discussion are, as it were, hierarchically organized, with four vague, general, fundamental problems at the top, a maze of specific, restricted, precise, specialized problems at the bottom, and in between a continuous range of problems, more and less specific, interconnecting the top and the bottom by means of the relationship "Problem P 1 is more fundamental than problem P 2, " or, equivalently, "Problem P 2 is subordinate to problem P 1 ." 10 A few universal, fundamental problems are needed so that we do not get lost in the maze of restricted, specialized problem solving. These fundamental problems must be formulated informally, imprecisely, without restricting specific presuppositions, just so that all people everywhere, in all societies, cultures and circumstances, can in principle interpret their own more or less specific, basic problems as specific versions or interpretations of the four fundamental problems, as formulated above. Only this can ensure that no one is excluded a priori from entering into rational inquiry by their own specific circumstances, view of the world or philosophy of life. In addition, we need discussion of more precise, restricted problems so that we can make progress with solving our problems, as a result of putting into practice the third and fourth of the above four rules of rational problem solving, (c) and (d).

Universalism needs to be implicit in the way in which our own personal thinking and problem solving is organized, so that we may have the best opportunity to understand and learn from others, even from those who think very differently from ourselves-learning from others being essential for the development of our own capacity to recognize and solve our own problems. 11 Universalism needs to be built into education, into the intellectual-institutional structure of scientific, academic inquiry, and generally, into our whole social, political, economic and cultural order, on a worldwide basis, so that learning, understanding and cooperation between people is given every opportunity to flourish.

There is nothing autocratic or doctrinaire in what I am advocating here, just because universalism amounts to a kind of intellectual inquiry, a way of thinking or problem solving which, when put into practice, gives us our maximum chances of discovering for ourselves what our own unique problems are and how they are to be solved, enabling us, ideally, to exploit for this purpose the very best thinking or problem solving that humanity has to offer. The autocratic and doctrinaire, the dogmatic, arise to the extent that we fail to put universalism into practice.