AOE and its generalization, aim-oriented rationality (AOR), incorporate all the good points of Popper's falsificationist conception of science and its generalization, critical rationalism, indicated above, but also improve on Popper's notions, in being designed to help science and other worthwhile endeavours progressively improve problematic aims and methods.

10.7 The New Enlightenment, step (iii): from knowledge to wisdom I come now to step (iii) of the New Enlightenment Programme. The task, here, is to help humanity gradually get more AOR into diverse aspects of social and institutional life-personal, political, economic, educational, international-so that humanity may gradually learn how to make progress towards an enlightened world. Social inquiry, in taking up this task, needs to be pursued as social methodology or social philosophy. What the philosophy of science is to science, as conceived by AOE, so sociology is to the social world: it has the task of helping diverse valuable human endeavours and institutions gradually improve aims and methods so that the world may make social progress towards global enlightenment. (The sociology of science, as a special case, is one and the same thing as the philosophy of science.) And a basic task of academic inquiry, more generally, becomes to help humanity solve its problems of living in increasingly rational, cooperative, enlightened ways, thus helping humanity become more civilized. The basic aim of academic inquiry becomes, as I have already said, to promote the growth of wisdom. Those parts of academic inquiry devoted to improving knowledge, understanding and technological know-how contribute to the growth of wisdom. The New Enlightenment Programme thus has dramatic and far-reaching implications for academic inquiry, for almost every branch and aspect of science and the humanities, for its overall character and structure, its overall aims and methods, and its relationship to the rest of the social world. I have spelled out in some detail what these implications are in a number of publications.As I have already remarked, the aim of achieving global civilization is inherently problematic.This means, according to AOR, that we need to represent the aim at a number of levels, from the specific and highly problematic to the unspecific and unproblematic. Thus, at a fairly specific level, we might, for example, specify civilization to be a state of affairs in which there is an end to war, dictatorships, population growth, extreme inequalities of wealth, and the establishment of democratic, liberal world government and a sustainable world industry and agriculture. At a rather more general level, we might specify civilization to be a state of affairs in which everyone shares equally in enjoying, sustaining and creating what is of value in life in so far as this is possible.1 depicts a cartoon version of what is required, arrived at by generalizing and then reinterpreting1 (see Chapter 2).

As a result of building into our institutions and social life such a hierarchical structure of aims and associated methods, we create a framework within which it becomes possible for us progressively to improve our real-life aims and methods in increasingly cooperative ways as we

A world with global democracy that puts the new Enlightenment into practice A world that is democratic, liberal, just, sustainable, rational and wise A world in which everyone shares equally in enjoying sustaining and creating what is of value, in so far as this is possible That ideal, realizable social order (whatever it may be) we ought to try to attain in the long term1 Aim-oriented rationality applied to the task of making progress towards a civilized world (Source: author) live. Diverse philosophies of life-diverse religious, political, economic and moral views-may be cooperatively developed, assessed and tested against the experience of personal and social life. It becomes possible progressively to improve diverse philosophies of life (diverse views about what is of value in life and how it is to be realized), much as theories are progressively and cooperatively improved in science.

AOR is especially relevant when it comes to resolving conflicts cooperatively. If two groups have partly conflicting aims but wish to discover the best resolution of the conflict, AOR helps in requiring of those involved that they represent aims at a level of sufficient imprecision for agreement to be possible, thus creating an agreed framework within which disagreements may be explored and resolved. AOR cannot, of itself, combat non-cooperativeness, or induce a desire for cooperativeness; it can, however, facilitate the cooperative resolution of conflicts if the desire for this exists. In facilitating the cooperative resolution of conflicts in this way, AOR can, in the long term, encourage the desire for cooperation to grow (if only because it encourages belief in the possibility of cooperation).

10.8 Objections

I now consider, briefly, some objections that may be raised against my claim that the "New Enlightenment" improves on the Popperian version of the Enlightenment Programme.

It may be objected that the Traditional Enlightenment does not dominate current academic inquiry to the extent that I have assumed. But grounds for holding that it does are given in chapter six of my From Knowledge to Wisdom. There I looked at the following: (1) books about the modern university; (2) the philosophy and sociology of science; (3) statements of leading scientists; (4) physics abstracts; (5) chemistry, biology, geo and psychology abstracts; (6) journal titles and contents; (7) books on economics, sociology and psychology; (8) philosophy. In 1984, the year From Knowledge to Wisdom was published, there can be no doubt whatsoever that the Traditional Enlightenment (or "the philosophy of knowledge", as I called it in the book) dominated academic inquiry.