We have seen, so far, that AOE recognizes, ultimately, just one nonempirical criterion, unity or compatibility with physicalism, 5 whereas MAI recognizes many, and makes no attempt to show that these all devolve from just one basic criterion. But I come now to a non-empirical criterion which AOE holds to be absolutely central, but which MAI does not even recognize as an aesthetic criterion at all: explanatory power.

Explanatory power is an ambiguous concept. We may hold that T 1 has more explanatory power than T 2 if (1) T 1 has greater empirical content than T 2 , or if (2) T 1 has greater unity than T 2 even though it has the same empirical content. Let us call these type (1) and type (2) explanatory power respectively.

We need also to recognize that criteria legitimately employed in science to assess theories can be put into three categories: (a) empirical, (b) empirical-dependent, and (c) non-empirical. By (a) I mean simply the predictive success of the theory in question; by (b) I mean properties of theories that have to do with how amenable they are to being assessed empirically, such as testability and empirical content; and by (c) I mean properties of theories that have nothing directly to do with empirical success but which are deemed to be indicative of truth, or of potential empirical success. Type (1) explanatory power is a typical type (b) property of theories. But, according to AOE, type (2) explanatory power is the key type (c) non-empirical property of theories from which, as we have seen, all others, such as symmetry, simplicity or metaphysical allegiance, arise. In seeking to acquire knowledge about the world, we actively hunt for clues as to the kind of universe we are in, and hence the kind of theories we need to develop. The big clue that we have (apparently) discovered, is that the universe is more or less comprehensible in some way or other, it being possible to discover explanations for phenomena; this is enshrined in theses of comprehensibility and physical comprehensibility, at levels 5 and 4 of Figure 2.1. The level 5 thesis of comprehensibility is the bold conjecture that the universe is perfectly comprehensible in some way or other-the universe being such that there is some one kind of explanation for all phenomena, couched in terms of God, a cosmic purpose (which everything is designed to fulfil), a cosmic programme, a unified physical entity, or something else. From Galileo on, science has, in effect, made the even bolder conjecture that the universe is physically comprehensible, at level 4, and comprehensible in terms of the best available blueprint, at level 3. Type (2) explanatory power, to repeat, is the key type (c) non-empirical criterion of theory choice, from which all other type (c) criteria arise. If any property of theories cries out to be the aesthetic property of beauty, which scientists quite properly take note of as being methodologically significant, it is type (2) explanatory power.

And yet, astonishingly, MAI does not even include explanatory power in its list of aesthetic properties of theories, despite its openended, all-inclusive approach to listing such properties (in such sharp contrast to AOE).

MAI does hold that the requirement of type (2) explanatory power is a permanent criterion of science, one that can be arrived at by aim-analysis, taking the aim of science to be empirical adequacyIt is clear that type (2), and not merely type (1), explanatory power is intended here, for McAllister writes that a successful explanatory theory is deemed to have "identified a pattern or mechanism underlying the data"But such an analysis could only, at most, justify adopting the requirement of type (1) explanatory power; it does not justify adopting type (2) explanatory power as a requirement-not unless the truth, the universe that is, is permanently presumed to have a more or less unified dynamic structure (a presumption which contradicts SE). McAllister provides no argument in support of the contention that favouring theories with type (2) explanatory power can be justified by an appeal to the aim of empirical adequacy. He does refer to an approach to the problem of induction, espoused by Braithwaite and Mellor, according to which we are justified in proceeding as if regularities or patterns exist in nature because this gives us the best hope of acquiring knowledge whatever the universe may be likeIt is this argument, perhaps, which McAllister assumes justifies taking type (2) explanatory power as a permanent criterion for theory choice, arrived at by aim-analysis, taking the aim of science to be empirical adequacy.

But there are three things wrong with this. First, the Braithwaite-Mellor justification of induction does not work, as I shall show in the next section.

Second, many different kinds of explanation are possible; the universe may be comprehensible (phenomena being explainable) in many different ways, and to many different degrees, as the different theses from levels 3 to 7 of AOE attest. Here, above all, science needs to be flexible and responsive, constantly modifying the kind of explanations to be sought in the light of empirical success and failure, in the kind of way in which the hierarchical methodological structure of AOE is designed to facilitate. If ever there was a role for the aesthetic induction, it would surely be here, in connection with explanatory power. But in excluding type (2) explanatory power from the list of aesthetic properties, and in making it a fixed, unchanging requirement of theory choice, MAI fails to exploit this vital need for science constantly to modify and improve the kind of explanations that it seeks. It is just this, by contrast, that is the key idea behind AOE.