Thus simplicity cannot be equated with falsifiability.

And there is a further, even more devastating point. Popper's methodological rules favour T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 over T, especially if h 1 , h 2 and h 3 have been severely tested, and corroborated. But in scientific practice, T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 would never even be considered, however highly corroborated it might be if considered, because of its extreme lack of simplicity or unity, its grossly ad hoc character. There is here a fundamental flaw in the central doctrine of The Logic of Scientific Discovery., Popper put forward a new methodological principle which, when added to those of the earlier book, succeeds in excluding theories such as T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 from scientific consideration. This principle states that a new theory, in order to be acceptable, "should proceed from some simple, new, and powerful, unifying idea about some connection or relation (such as gravitational attraction) between hitherto unconnected things (such as planets and apples) or facts (such as inertial and gravitational mass) or new "theoretical entities" (such as field and particles)"T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 does not "proceed from some simple, new and powerful, unifying idea", and is to be rejected on that account, even if more highly corroborated than T.

But the adoption of this "requirement of simplicity" (as Popper calls it) as a basic methodological principle of science, has the effect of permanently excluding from science all ad hoc theories (such as T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 ) that fail to satisfy the principle, however empirically successful such theories might be if considered. This amounts to assuming permanently that the universe is such that no ad hoc theory, that fails to satisfy Popper's principle of simplicity, is true. It amounts to accepting, as a permanent item of scientific knowledge, the substantial metaphysical thesis that the universe is non-ad hoc, in the sense that no theory that fails to satisfy Popper's principle of simplicity is true. But this clashes with Popper's criterion of demarcation: that no unfalsifiable, metaphysical thesis is to be accepted as a part of scientific knowledge.It is, in fact, important that Popper's criterion of demarcation is rejected, and the metaphysical thesis of non-ad hocness is explicitly acknowledged to be a part of scientific knowledge. The thesis, in the form in which it is implicitly adopted at any given stage in the development of science, may well be false. Scientific progress may require that it be modified. The thesis needs to be made explicit, in other words, for good Popperian reasons, namely, so that it can be critically assessed, and perhaps improved. As long as Popper's demarcation criterion is upheld, the metaphysical thesis must remain implicit, and hence immune to criticism.Popper's falsificationism can be modified, however, so that substantial metaphysical theses, implicit in methods that exclude ad hoc theories, are made explicit within science, and are acknowledged to be basic items of (conjectural) scientific knowledge, thus becoming open to critical scrutiny and revision. The outcome is a more rational, a more intellectually rigorous kind of science, just because substantial, influential and problematic metaphysical theses, implicit in the methods of science, become explicitly criticizable and improvable.

The moment we acknowledged that there is a persistent metaphysical thesis implicit in the methods of science, two new problems leap to our attention. What, precisely, does this metaphysical thesis assert? And on what grounds is it to be (conjecturally) accepted as a part of scientific knowledge? AOE is put forward as the solution to these two problems.

As far as the first of the above two problems is concerned, a wide range of metaphysical theses are available. At one extreme, we might adopt a metaphysical thesis that excludes only utterly silly theories; at the other extreme, we might adopt the thesis that the universe is physically comprehensible in the sense that it has a unified dynamic structure, some yet-to-be-discovered unified physical "theory of everything" being true-a thesis that I shall call "physicalism". We might even adopt some specific version of physicalism, which asserts that the underlying physical unity is of a specific type: it is made up of a unified field perhaps, or a quantum field, or empty, curved, topologically complex space-time, or a quantum string field. Other things being equal, the more specific the thesis (and thus the more it excludes) so the more likely it is to be false, whereas the more unspecific it is so the more likely it is to be true.

As far as the second of the above two problems is concerned, there are three considerations that we can appeal to, wholly Popperian in spirit if not to the letter of Popperian doctrine:

(1) If some metaphysical thesis, M, is implicit in some scientific methodological practice, then science is more rigorous if M is made explicit, since this facilitates criticism of it, the consideration of alternatives. (2) A metaphysical thesis may be such that its truth is a necessary condition for it to be possible for us to acquire knowledge: if so, accepting the thesis explicitly can only help, and cannot undermine, the pursuit of knowledge of truth. (3) Given two rival metaphysical theses, M 1 and M 2 , it may be the case that M 1 supports an empirical scientific research programme that has apparently met with far greater empirical success than any rival empirical research programme based on M 2 : in this case we may favour M 1 over M 2 , at least until M 2 , or some third thesis, M 3 , shows signs of supporting an even more empirically progressive research programme.