Science, reason, knowledge and wisdom: a critique of specialism

9.1 Introduction

In this chapter I argue for a kind of intellectual inquiry which has, as its basic aim, to help all of us to resolve rationally the most important problems that we encounter in our lives, problems that arise as we seek to discover and achieve that which is of value in life. Rational problem solving involves articulating our problems, proposing and criticizing possible solutions. It also involves breaking problems up into subordinate problems, creating a tradition of specialized problem solving-specialized scientific, academic inquiry, in other words. It is vital, however, that specialized academic problem solving be subordinated to discussion of our more fundamental problems of living. At present specialized academic inquiry is dissociated from problems of living-the sin of specialism, which I criticize.

I proceed by discussing two rival views about the nature of intellectual inquiry that I call universalism and specialism. 1 My claim is that at present the whole institutional structure of academic inquiry, by and large, presupposes specialism. Of the two views under consideration it is, however, universalism, and not specialism, which provides us with a rational conception of intellectual inquiry. Failure to put universalism into practice has profoundly damaging consequences for science and scholarship, and indeed for life, for our whole modern world. Ideally intellectual inquiry ought to help us to tackle rationally those problems of living which we encounter in seeking to discover and achieve that which is of value in life. Intellectual inquiry ought, in other words, to devote reason to the enhancement of wisdom (wisdom being defined here as the capacity to discover and achieve that which is of value in life, for oneself and others-wisdom thus including knowledge and understanding, but much else besides). In fact, at present, scientific, academic inquiry gives priority to the achievement of knowledge only, rather than to the achievement of wisdom. It is essentially the general adoption of specialism which is responsible for the persistence of this highly undesirable state of affairs.

9.2 Universalism

According to universalism, a proper, basic task of intellectual inquiry is to help us to improve our answers to four universal-or fundamentalquestions, namely:

(1) What kind of world is this? (2) How do we fit into the world and how did we come to be? (3) What is of most value in life and how is it to be achieved? (4) How can we help develop a better human world? 2

In particular, according to universalism, it is a basic task of intellectual inquiry to help us to tackle these four fundamental problems in a rational fashion and, where many people are involved, in a cooperatively rational fashion. Rational problem solving is understood here to involve, at the very least, putting into practice the two rules or methods:

(a) Articulate, and seek to improve the articulation of, the problem to be solved. (b) Propose and critically assess possible solutions.There is of course more to rational problem solving than this. 4 But these two rules are understood by universalism to constitute the nub of rationality.

Thus, according to universalism, the central and fundamental task of intellectual inquiry is to improve the articulation of the above four problems, and to propose and critically assess possible solutions to them. All other intellectual activity is subservient to this.

It deserves to be noted, in passing, that these four fundamental problems can be regarded as components of just one, even more fundamental problem-the fundamental problem of all thought and life: How can our human world, and the world of sentient life more generally, imbued with perceptual qualities, consciousness, free will, meaning and value, exist and best flourish, embedded as it is in the physical universe?It is important that the four basic problems are coalesced into this one fundamental problem, so that we are brought face to face with the horrendous issues that arise as to how all that we hold precious in life can conceivably exist and flourish if we really are just a part of the physical universe, everything we do and are being precisely determined by physics.

A basic idea of universalism is that ideally it is we ourselves who answer the above four questions, as we live. The proper task of reason, of thought, of intellectual inquiry, is to help us to arrive at answers that we really do wish to give to these questions, answers that do justice to what is true and genuinely of value, rather than to determine the answers for us. Intellectual inquiry is our servant, not our master. It is not in itself any kind of authority or oracle.

There are two further extremely important, elementary rules or methods of rational problem solving:

(c) Break up the basic problem to be solved into subordinate, specialized, easier-to-solve problems. (d) Interconnect attempts to solve basic and specialized problems, so that the one may influence and be influenced by the other. 6

According to universalism, an immense amount of intellectual activity arises, quite properly, as a result of putting these two heuristic rules into practice. That is, in order to improve our answers to our four basic problems, we create a vast network of sub-problems and preliminary problems-the specialized, technical problems of science and scholarship. A great deal of intellectual activity consists in seeking to solve these limited, technical problems of specialized scientific, academic disciplines. It is, however, of supreme importance-according to universalism-that we do not lose our way within this network, this maze, of sub-problems. If intellectual inquiry is to be rational, it is essential that intellectual priority be given to the four fundamental problems, and to the tasks of proposing and critically assessing possible solutions to them. In order to tackle specialized problems in a rational fashion, in short, it is essential to tackle such problems as sub-problems of the four fundamental problems. Specialized scientists and scholars, in other words, in order to be rational, must also be philosophers or generalists, concerned in their specialized work to help us solve our fundamental problems.