. This leads, however, to the development of a number of rival imprecise possible solutions-rival cosmologies-with no indication as to how we are to make these vague ideas precise and choose between them. In order to proceed, we need to put into practice the third and fourth rules of rational problem solving: each vague solution needs to generate preliminary, subordinate, specialized problem solving. If one such approach begins to achieve apparent spectacular specialized success, then this entitles us to take this general approach especially seriously. Thus the spectacular specialized successes of Kepler and Galileo entitle us to take especially seriously their common vague cosmological presupposition: "the book of Nature is written in the language ofmathematics." If science is to proceed rationally, however, it is essential that there continues to be an interplay between our best ideas as to how the overall problem is to be solved, and our best solutions to subordinate problems. In particular, our assessment of possible solutions to subordinate problems-testable scientific laws and theories-must not be dissociated from our assessment of untestable, metaphysical ideas as to how the overall problem is to be solved. Popper, however, violates this elementary, general requirement for rationality, in insisting that assessment of scientific laws and theories is dissociated from assessment of metaphysical ideas. Furthermore, it is precisely this irrational insistence which creates, for Popper, the insoluble problem of induction. The impossibility of assessing scientific laws and theories solely with respect to empirical success is a special case of the general irrationality of attempting to assess possible solutions to subordinate problems independently of vague ideas about how to solve the overall problem. The problem of induction, in short, is a product of specialism, the insolubility of the problem, as traditionally conceived, an indication of the irrationality of specialism as far as science is concerned. 33. Ironically enough, Popper does come close to acknowledging the Russellian point that the methods of science make implicit metaphysical presuppositions about the nature of the world (see. pp. 252-4), despite explicit disavowals elsewhere (see. He fails, however, to emphasize that critical rationalism requires that we explicitly articulate these metaphysical presuppositions, so that they may be criticized, and thus, we may hope, improved, as an integral part of science, so that the methods of science may be improved with our improving knowledge. Just this way of doing science was instigated by Einstein in developing the special and general theories of relativity, as we saw in Chapter 3. The invariance and symmetry principles of modern physics-which can be interpreted as either methodological or metaphysical principles-are a development of Einstein's profound innovation. However, modern physics, and modern science quite generally, fail to put into practice, explicitly and fully, Einstein's way of doing science, in that they fail to articulate and criticize actual and possible aims and methods-or philosophies of science-as an integral part of science itself. The institutional reorganization that this requires-namely philosophy of science pursued as an integral part of science itself-has not been carried out. This is of course in part due to the fact that the scientific community accepts Popper's falsificationist demarcation criterion for dividing off science from non-science. Views about what ought to be the aims and methods of science-philosophies of science-not being themselves testable theories in any straightforward sense, have no place in science itself according to traditional, and Popperian, empiricism.

Thus scientific integrity at present demands that discussion of aims and methods be excluded from science, instead of demanding that this discussion constitutes an integral part of science (as required by aim-oriented empiricism or universalism). At present, by and large, science departments and departments of history and philosophy of science do not speak to each other (although in recent years a bit of dialogue has been instigated). To this extent Popper, rather than Einstein, is institutionalized. This institutionalization of Popperian methodology prevents us from developing a genuinely rational, fundamentalist science. 34. For Einstein's advocacy of universalism see, for example, Einstein. See also Chapter 3 of the present book. 35. See note 16. 36. It should be noted that the basic objection to Kuhn's prescription for science applies with almost equal force to Lakatos's prescription as outlined in his. Lakatos's problem is to reconcile the dogmatism of Kuhn's normal science, on the one hand, with the anti-dogmatic, critical falsificationism of Popper, on the other hand, taking into account especially Feyerabend's important point that in order to test a given theory severely, we need to possess, and even develop, alternative theories (see). Lakatos's solution is to prescribe for science simultaneous competing fragments of Kuhnian normal science-competing research programmes-thus doing justice simultaneously to Kuhnian dogmatism and Feyerabendian pluralism. Lakatos makes it abundantly clear, however, that ultimately only relative empirical success ought to decide the fate of research programmes within science. There is thus no essential role, within Lakatos's conception of science, for sustained critical development of our best metaphysical answer to the problem "What kind of world is this?", so that the hard cores of research programmes could be assessed in part in terms of this answer. Lakatos advocates a kind of competitive specialism. In terms of our obstacle-course analogy, Lakatos sees science as a number of competing individuals, with different routes in mind, stumbling blindly from A to B. 37. For a powerful criticism of the idea that the social sciences should be value-neutral, see