Most contemporary externalist historians of science and sociologists of knowledge would probably agree that the specialist programme of excluding social and cultural influences from intellectual inquiry cannot succeed, and is even perhaps incoherent. One might suppose that as a result of recognizing the general untenability of specialism, these writers would advocate and practise universalism. In fact, one finds nothing of the kind. Perversely, like Kuhn, these writers continue to accept and practise specialism-contributing to the highly specialized disciplines of history of science and sociology of knowledge. The main implication of their work is to undermine specialism; but if those who do this work do not themselves see this implication, how can anyone else be expected to see it? Once again we see the extraordinarily powerful hold that specialism has over the contemporary academic mind.Specialism, then, quite generally, must be rejected. All specialized problem solving dissociated from fundamental problem solving must be held to be seriously irrational.

This simple point has profound and far-reaching implications for the whole of scientific, academic inquiry, and for education. For we have seen that scientific, academic inquiry is on the whole at present organized, institutionalized, along specialist, rather than critical fundamentalist, lines. The urgently needed enterprise of discussing fundamental problems in an informal, informed, critical manner-in a manner capable of influencing, and being influenced by, specialized problem solving-is obstructed by the prevalence of irrational specialist intellectual standards.

9.6 Why does specialism prevail?

If universalism, and not specialism, provides us with a rational conception of intellectual inquiry, why is it that it is specialism which exercises the predominant influence over most actual scientific, academic work?

The question becomes all the more poignant when we realize how little is new or original in the critique of specialism offered here. Writing over seventy years ago now, Aldous Huxley said:

Artistic creation and scientific research may be, and constantly are, used as devices for escaping from the responsibilities of life. They are proclaimed to be ends absolutely good in themselves-ends so admirable that those who pursue them are excused from bothering about anything else. This is particularly true of contemporary science. The mass of accumulated knowledge is so great that it is now impossible for any individual to have a thorough grasp of more than one small field of study. Meanwhile, no attempt is made to produce a comprehensive synthesis of the general results of scientific research. Our universities possess no chair of synthesis. All endowments, moreover, go to special subjects-and almost always to subjects which have no need of further endowment, such as physics, chemistry and mechanics. In our institutions of higher learning about ten times as much is spent on the natural sciences as on the sciences of man. All our efforts are directed, as usual, to producing improved means to unimproved ends. Meanwhile intensive specialization tends to reduce each branch of science to a condition almost approaching meaninglessness. There are many men of science who are actually proud of this state of things. Specialized meaninglessness has come to be regarded, in certain circles, as a kind of hall-mark of true science. Those who attempt to relate the small particular results of specialization with human life as a whole and its relation to the universe at large are accused of being bad scientists, charlatans, self-advertisers. The people who make such accusations do so, of course, because they do not wish to take any responsibility for anything, but merely to retire to their cloistered laboratories, and there amuse themselves by performing delightfully interesting researches. Science and art are only too often a superior kind of dope, possessing this advantage over booze and morphia: that they can be indulged in with a good conscience and with the conviction that, in the process of indulging, one is leading the "higher life".In fairness to Huxley-in order to excuse the mildness of his words herewe must remember how long ago this passage was written. Since that time, before the Second World War, everything that Huxley spoke of has of course become much worse.

How and why has this happened? In fact, of course, anyone who has sought to put universalism into practice, and who has explored specialized problems for the light they throw on fundamental problems, will have no difficulty in answering this question. Here, briefly, are seven factors responsible for the ever-increasing tyranny of specialism.

1. We fail to put universalism into practice primarily because, as Huxley points out, we fail to take up a measure of personal responsibility for the world in which we find ourselves. And we fail to take up such personal responsibility because of the enormous difficulties that we must inevitably encounter at present in seeking to do so.

These difficulties have arisen as a kind of unforeseen side-effect of the way in which our human world has evolved throughout recorded history. For consider the way in which the problem arises for those who live in the kind of "human world" experienced by people in prehistorical timessmall, closely knit hunting and gathering tribes. In such circumstances, the difficulties that we experience in attempting to assume some personal responsibility for our world do not really arise. Adults, and even children, can without great difficulty assume some measure of personal responsibility for the welfare of the tribe as a whole. All the members of the tribe are known to each individual personally. Relationships of mutual interdependence are experienced daily, on a personal basis, in hunting, gathering food and so on. Obligations, responsibilities towards the tribe, can be experienced in a personal, emotional way, in terms of known individuals, in much the same way as we can experience responsibilities towards our family today. (Perhaps the modern family should be understood as a contraction of the prehistorical tribe.) All members of the tribe have a common outlook on things, a common cosmology and system of values. Thus barriers to intimacy, to mutual understanding, do not arise as a result of differences of outlook and values. Individuals do not face agonizing problems of deciding who they are, how they should live, what there is to give meaning and value to life. On the contrary, the meaning and value of life as lived by the tribe is assured, and is even beyond question, in that no alternative is conceivable. Finally, because of the relative smallness of the tribe, each individual makes a personal impact on the life of the tribe as a whole, and can be well aware of this impact. The tribe, as it were, acknowledges the existence, value and potency of the individual, and is clearly affected by the actions of the individual.