All accepted fundamental physical theories, from Newton on, can be given a Lagrangian formulation. Furthermore, if we consider the totality of fundamental physical theory since Newton (empirical laws being included if no theory has been developed) then, as in the case of physicalism

, every new accepted theory has brought the totality of physical theory nearer to capturing Lagrangianism. Thus Lagrangianism is at least as scientifically fruitful as physicalism. In fact it is more scientifically fruitful since it is very much more specific and contentful. The reasons for accepting physicalism(8) are reasons for accepting Lagrangianism too as the lowest thesis in the hierarchy of metaphysical theses, very much more potentially scientifically fruitful than physicalism(8), but also more speculative, more likely to need revision (see

It deserves to be noted that something like the hierarchy of metaphysical theses, constraining acceptance of physical theory from above, is to be found at the empirical level, constraining acceptance of theory from below. There are, at the lowest level, the results of experiments performed at specific times and places. Then, above these, there are low-level experimental laws, asserting that each experimental result is a repeatable effect. Next up, there are empirical laws such as Hooke's law, Ohm's law or the gas laws. Above these there are such physical laws as those of electrostatics or of thermodynamics. And above these there are theories which have been refuted, but which can be "derived", when appropriate limits are taken, from accepted fundamental theory-as Newtonian theory can be "derived" from general relativity. This empirical hierarchy, somewhat informal perhaps, exists in part for precisely the same epistemological and methodological reasons I have given for the hierarchical ordering of metaphysical theses: so that relatively contentless and secure theses (at the bottom of the hierarchy) may be distinguished from more contentful and insecure theses (further up the hierarchy) to facilitate pinpointing what needs to be revised, and how, should the need for revision arise. That such a hierarchy exists at the empirical level provides further support for my claim that we need to adopt such a hierarchy at the metaphysical level.

5.8 Alternative versions of aim-oriented empiricism

The hierarchical view depicted in

.1 may need to be rejected in its entirety as physics advances. If we exclude from consideration physicalism(n = 1, N = ∞), which permits anything, the hierarchical view assumes that the universe is at least partially physically comprehensible in the sense that phenomena occur in accordance with physical laws which are more or less disunified, the traditional distinction between laws and initial conditions being presupposed. But even though the universe is physically comprehensible, the traditional distinction between laws and initial conditions might not be observed. The true theory of everything might be cosmological in character, and might specify unique initial conditions for the universe.This possibility, and other possibilities of this kind, could no doubt be accommodated within a modified version of the above hierarchical view. But there are other possibilities, of philosophical interest even if of no interest to physics as at present constituted, which cannot be so accommodated. Perhaps God is ultimately responsible for all natural phenomena, or some kind of cosmic purpose or cosmic programme analogous to a computer program (as has been suggested). In these cases the universe would be comprehensible but not physically comprehensible-even though it might mimic a physically comprehensible universe, to some extent.

In order to accommodate these, and other such, possibilities we need to embed the above hierarchical view in the broader view I have called "aim-oriented empiricism" (AOE), depicted in

1. However, in order to do this, AOE, as depicted in

.1, needs to be modified. In this modified figure, we would have in succession, as we go up the hierarchy, empirical phenomena (level 1); accepted fundamental physical theory (level 2); best blueprint (level 3); then, at level 4, the thesis that the universe is perfectly comprehensible physically-physicalism(n=8); at level 5 the thesis that the universe is all but perfectly comprehensible physically-physicalism(n>4, N=1); at level 6, the thesis that the universe is partially comprehensible physically-physicalism(n>4, N<10); at level 7, the thesis that the universe is partially comprehensible, either physically or in some other way; at level 8, the thesis of meta-knowability: the universe is such that we can discover how to improve our methods of learning; and finally, at level 9, the thesis of partial knowability: the universe is such that we can acquire some knowledge of our local circumstances.

The level 8 thesis, here, asserts that the universe is such that there is some rationally discoverable proposition about its nature (relative to existing knowledge) which, if accepted, makes it possible progressively to improve methods for the improvement of knowledge. "Rationally discoverable" means at least that the thesis is not an arbitrary choice from infinitely many analogous theses. This thesis is to be interpreted as asserting that the universe is not epistemologically malicious, in the sense that apparently improved methods lead to apparent new knowledge which turns out, subsequently, to be illusory, there being no possibility of discovering this before it is revealed. (This is clarified in the next section.) Level 9 asserts that the universe is such that we can continue to acquire knowledge of our local circumstances, sufficient to make life possible.