Two difficulties arise, however, when one attempts to useto select the best available metaphysical thesis from the infinitely many options available. As far asis concerned, any thesis sufficiently substantial to exclude empirically successful crackpot theories from science is such that acquisition of knowledge might still be possible even if the thesis is false. On the other hand, any thesis such that its truth is necessary for knowledge to be acquired is much too insubstantial to exclude crackpot theories. As far asis concerned, given any metaphysical thesis, M, that supports a non-crackpot empirically progressive scientific research programme, we can mimic this with a crackpot M* that supports a crackpot empirically progressive research programme, with a series of crackpot theories, T 1 *, T 2 *, , these theories becoming progressively more and more empirically successful, and closer and closer to exemplifying M*. These two difficulties can be overcome, however, if physics is construed as adopting a hierarchy of metaphysical conjectures concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe, these conjectures becoming more and more insubstantial as one ascends the hierarchy, more and more likely to be true (see1 in Chapter 2). At the top of the hierarchy, there is the conjecture that the universe is such that some (conjectural) knowledge of our local circumstances can be acquired, sufficient to make life possible. This, and the next conjecture down are, I argue, to be accepted as permanent items of scientific knowledge, in accordance with (2), on the grounds, that is, that such acceptance can only help, and cannot hinder, the search for factual knowledge whatever the universe may be like. At level 4 the conjecture to be adopted is, I argue, physicalism. At level 5 there is the less precise conjecture that the universe is comprehensible in some way or other. At level 3 there is the best currently available more or less specific version of physicalism, which I call the current "metaphysical blueprint". Examples from the history of physics include the following: the universe consists of (a) corpuscles, which interact by contact; (b) point atoms, which interact by means of forces; (c) a unified classical field; (d) a unified quantum field; (e) empty, curved, topologically complex space-time; and (f) a unified quantum string field. At level 2 are currently accepted fundamental physical theories, and at level 1 there are empirical data. Two considerations govern acceptance of metaphysical conjectures from level 3 to level 6. Any such conjecture must, as far as possible, (A) exemplify, be a precise version of, and imply, the next conjecture up in the hierarchy, (B) be more empirically fruitful than any rival conjecture, in that it is a part of an empirical research programme that seems to be more empirically progressive than any rival research programme, in accordance with (3) above. Two considerations also govern acceptance of testable fundamental dynamical physical theories. Such a theory must be such that (i) it, together with all other accepted fundamental physical theories, exemplifies, or is a special case of, the best available metaphysical blueprint (at level 3) to a sufficiently good extent, and (ii) it is sufficiently successful empirically (where empirical success is to be understood, roughly, in a Popperian sense).

This hierarchical view of AOE overcomes the two difficulties, indicated above, roughly as follows. Only the top two theses are accepted as a result of an appeal to (2); theses at levels 3 to 5 are accepted as a result of (a) an appeal to (3), and (b) compatibility with the top two theses at levels 7 and 6; this suffices to exclude aberrant rivals at levels 3 to 5 (which might be construed to support aberrant, empirically progressive research programmes). For further details of how AOE overcomes the two difficulties indicated above, and for further details of the view itself, see previous chapters.A basic idea of AOE is to channel or direct criticism so that it is as fruitful as possible, from the standpoint of aiding progress in knowledge. The function of criticism within science is to promote scientific progress. When criticism demonstrably cannot help promote scientific progress, it becomes irrational (the idea behind (2) above). In an attempt to make criticism as fruitful as possible, we need to try to direct it at targets that are the most fruitful, the most productive, to criticize (from the standpoint of the growth, the improvement of knowledge). This is the basic idea behind the hierarchy of AOE. Conjectures at all levels remain open to criticism. But, as we ascend the hierarchy, conjectures are less and less likely to be false; it is less and less likely that criticism, here, will help promote scientific knowledge.The best currently available level 3 conjecture is almost bound to be false: the history of physics reveals, at this level, as I have indicated above, that a number of different conjectures have been adopted and rejected in turn. Here, criticism, the activity of developing alternatives (compatible with physicalism) is likely to be immensely fruitful for progress in theoretical physics. Indeed, in Chapter 3, and elsewhere, 26 I argue that this provides physics with a rational, though fallible and non-mechanical method for the discovery of new fundamental physical theories, a method invented and exploited by Einstein in discovering special and general relativity, something which Popper has argued is not possible (see