, in criticizing Kuhn on normal science, ignored these arguments in support of the necessity of normal science for scientific progress.

AOE holds that much scientific work ought indeed to resemble Kuhn's normal science, in part for reasons just indicated. But there are even more important considerations. According to AOE, and in sharp contrast with falsificationism, theoretical physics accepts a level 3 metaphysical blueprint, which exercises a powerful constraint on what kind of new theories physicists can try to develop, consider or accept. The blueprint has a role reminiscent, in some respects, of Kuhn's paradigm, and theoretical physics, working within the constraints of the blueprint, its non-empirical methods set by the blueprint, has some features of Kuhn's normal science.

Furthermore, according to AOE, other branches of natural science less fundamental than theoretical physics invariably presuppose relevant parts of more fundamental branches. Thus chemistry presupposes relevant parts of atomic theory and quantum theory, biology relevant parts of chemistry, astronomy relevant parts of physics. Such presuppositions of a science have a role, for that science, that is analogous to the role that the current level 3 blueprint, or the level 4 thesis of physicalism, has for theoretical physics. The presuppositions act as a powerful constraint on theorizing within the science. They set non-empirical methods for that science. Such presuppositions have a role, in other words, which is similar, in important respects, to Kuhn's paradigms. Viewed from an AOE perspective, one can readily see how and why much of science is Kuhnian puzzle solving rather than Popperian problem solving.

There are also, it must be emphasized, major differences between Kuhn and AOE. The chief difference is that, according to AOE, science has a paradigm for paradigms-to put it in Kuhnian terms.In order to be acceptable, level 3 blueprints must exemplify the level 4 thesis of physicalism (which in turn must exemplify the level 5 thesis of comprehensibility and so on, up to level 7). This means that, as long as physicalism continues to be accepted as the best available level 4 thesis for science, metaphysical blueprints can be assessed in a quasi non-empirical way, in terms of how well they accord with physicalism. Natural science is, according to AOE, one sustained, gigantic chunk of normal science, with physicalism as its paradigm. In this respect, AOE is more Kuhnian than Kuhn (in addition to being more Popperian than Popper!).

Like falsificationism, Kuhn's picture of science is hardly tenable. In the first place, it does not fit scientific practice very well. Normal science undoubtedly exists, as even Popper recognized; it may well be that most scientific activity has the character of Kuhn's normal science. But even when a discipline seems most like normal science, almost always there are a few scientists actively engaged in developing alternatives to the reigning paradigm. And on occasions, it is from the work of these few that a new paradigm, and a new phase of normal science, springs, often in a way that is quite different from Kuhn's account. It is not obvious that accumulation of anomalies, resulting in a crisis in biology, led to Darwin's theory of evolution. Quantum theory did not emerge, initially, from a crisis in classical physics. Planck's work around 1900 on blackbody radiation engendered the quantum revolution. It is true that classical physics, applied to a so-called black body emitting electromagnetic radiation, made a drastically incorrect prediction, but no one, not even Planck, thought that this posed a serious problem for classical physics. The fallacious prediction of classical physics was dubbed "the ultraviolet catastrophe", but this phrase was coined by Ehrenfest, after the quantum revolution was under way, around 1911, as propaganda for the new theory. It was Einstein who first recognized that Planck's work spelled the downfall of classical physics; but general recognition of this only came later, probably with Bohr's quantum theory of the atom, around 1913. Again, Einstein's general theory of relativity emerged, not because Newton's theory had accumulated anomalies and was in a state of crisis, but because it contradicted special relativity. Einstein sought a theory of gravitation compatible with special relativity, and it was this that led him to general relativity. These three revolutions, resulting in Darwinian theory, quantum theory and general relativity, are among the biggest and most important in the history of science; and yet they do not fit Kuhn's pattern.

Failure to fit scientific practice in detail does not, however, provide decisive grounds for rejecting a normative account of scientific method. One can always reply that the account specifies how science ought to proceed, not how it has in fact proceeded. Much more serious are the objections of principle to Kuhn's account. Kuhn, like Popper, provides no account of the creation of new paradigms. And given Kuhn's insistence that a new paradigm, after a successful revolution, is incommensurable with its pre-revolutionary predecessor, it would seem impossible to provide rational (if fallible) procedures for the creation of good new paradigms while maintaining consistency with the rest of Kuhn's views. Kuhn does allow that non-empirical criteria, or values, such as consistency and simplicity, are employed by science permanently (and therefore, presumably, across revolutions) to assess theories or paradigms; but Kuhn also emphasizes that these criteria are flexible and open to different interpretations