For an excellent recent discussion, and reference to further literature, see Howson (2000, especially ch. 1, pp. 30-4, 75-7, and ch. 5). See also Lipton (2004). 9. For a more detailed discussion of empirically successful ad hoc rivals to accepted theories, seeclaims that this argument cannot establish that physics assumes the truth of some more or less unified physical theory, and the falsity of all seriously disunified rival theories. It is, however, especially in the context of practical applications that physics requires predictions of accepted theories to be true, and clashing predictions of rival theories to be false. In contexts such as bridge-building, for example, we do indeed need to assume that relevant accepted laws will yield true predictions, and better empirically established but disunified rivals, that predict the bridge will collapse, are false. (Human lives are at stake.) In making such an assumption, against the evidence, we implicitly assume the truth of a metaphysical thesis concerning the unity of phenomena. For a more detailed rebuttal of Vicente's claim, see Maxwell (2010b, pp. 673-4). 11. It may be objected that the universe might have been genuinely disunified, so that physics could consist only of a great number of physical laws. In this case, it may be argued, physics could not be construed as making a metaphysical assumption about underlying unity. But even in this counterfactual situation, endlessly many very much more disunified but empirically more successful rival laws could easily be formulated: these would have to be rejected on nonempirical grounds, or physics would drown in an ocean of rival laws. The persistent rejection of such much more disunified but empirically more successful rivals would involve the methods of physics making an implicit metaphysical assumption, to the effect that nature is unified to some extent at least (all grossly disunified laws being false). It is necessary to make some such assumption, however disunified the totality of accepted laws may be-even if the assumption made is rather weak in character, in that only gross disunity is denied. 12. SeeSee the previous chapter, section 4.1, note 3 and associated texts for various attempts to solve the problem, and criticisms of those attempts. 14. The account of theoretical unity given here and in the last chapter simplifies the account given in, where unity is explicated as "exemplifying physicalism", where physicalism is a metaphysical thesis asserting that the universe has some kind of unified dynamic structure. Explicating unity in that way invites the charge of circularity, a charge that is not actually valid (seeThe account given here forestalls this charge from the outset. 15. This point is of fundamental importance for the problem of induction. Traditionally, the problem is interpreted as the problem of justifying exclusion of empirically successful theories that are ad hoc in sense (1): how can evidence from the past provide grounds for any belief about the future? This makes the problem seem highly "philosophical", remote from any problem realistically encountered in scientific practice. But the moment it is appreciated that the problem of justifying exclusion of empirically successful theories that are ad hoc in sense (1) is just an extreme, special case of the more general problem of excluding empirically successful theories that are ad hoc in senses (1) to (8), it becomes clear that this latter problem is a scientific problem, a problem of theoretical physics itself. For the implications of this crucial insight, and for a proposal as to how the problem of induction is to be solved that exploits this insight, seeSee also Chapter 7 of the present work, and, especially ch. 9).

be changed. Before the problem of induction can be solved, we need to change the currently accepted conception of science; indeed, we need to change, not just our conception of science, but science itself. Properly conceived, the problem of induction involves formulating a new conception of the aims and methods of science, more rigorous than current conceptions, which is such that the problem of induction no longer arises. The task is not to justify the status quo, but to change the status quo so that the problem of justification no longer arises. Popper's failed attempt at solving the problem stands head and shoulders above the rest just because it fits this prescription: it consists of a new view about the aims and methods of science, a new philosophy of science, namely falsificationism. 7. Aim-oriented empiricism was first expounded inIt was spelled out in greater detail in). 8. For the AOE account of what theoretical unification means, see Chapter 4. 9. In what follows "accept T" implies, not just "accept T as a working hypothesis for further research", but also "accept T for the purposes of technological and other practical applications, including contexts where human life may depend on the predictions of T being true". 10. All the possible phenomena, predicted by any dynamical physical theory, T, may be represented by an imaginary "space", S, each point in S corresponding to a particular phenomenon, a particular kind of physical system evolving in time in the way predicted by T. In order to specify severely disunified rivals to T that fit all available evidence just as well as T does, all we need do is specify a region in S that consists of phenomena that have not been observed, and then replace the phenomenon predicted by T with anything we care to think of. Given any T, there will always be infinitely many such disunified rivals to T. 11. For a more detailed discussion of empirically successful ad hoc rivals to accepted theories, see