That OQT does have this highly non-local character was discovered by Einstein, and was expounded in a famous paper by Einstein,Because of the evident clash with special relativity, Einstein concluded that this kind of non-local prediction of OQT is false. Particle 2 does have a precise position and momentum at time t 2 irrespective of whether measurements are performed on 1 or not, and QT must be interpreted as a purely statistical theory which gives only an incomplete description of the evolution of the individual system.

Einstein held that the only reasonable option available was to interpret QT in this way, as an inherently incomplete, statistical theory of "particles". There can be no doubt that this reinforced his conviction that QT did not constitute a proper starting point for future developments, which in turn reinforced Einstein's search for a unified field theory. Subsequent developments, due to Bohmand others, have shown that Einstein was wrong to dismiss the non-local predictions of OQT as not corresponding to reality: these predictions have now been experimentally confirmed! This concludes my case for saying Einstein invented and applied aim-oriented empiricism in scientific practice in developing the special and general theories of relativity, and in critically examining quantum theory.

But, it may be asked, did Einstein explicitly advocate aim-oriented empiricism? I turn now to a discussion of this question.

3.6 Did Einstein advocate aim-oriented empiricism?

There can be, to begin with, no doubt that Einstein devoted his life to the goal of discovering the unified structure of the universe and that, for him, this constituted an entirely proper aim for science, indeed, the noblest motive for pursuing scientific inquiry. Something of what the desire to understand meant to Einstein emerges from the following passage:

The most beautiful experience we can have is the mysterious. It is the fundamental emotion which stands at the cradle of true art and true science. Whoever does not know it and can no longer wonder, no longer marvel, is as good as dead, and his eyes are dimmed. It was the experience of mystery, even if mixed with fear, that engendered religion. A knowledge of the existence of something we cannot penetrate, our perceptions of the profoundest reason and the most radiant beauty, which only in their most primitive forms are accessible to our minds-it is this knowledge and this emotion that constitute true religiosity; in this sense, and in this alone, I am a deeply religious man. I cannot conceive of a God who rewards and punishes his creatures, or has a will of the kind that we experience in ourselves. Neither can I nor would I want to conceive of an individual that survives his physical death; let feeble souls, from fear or absurd egoism, cherish such thoughts. I am satisfied with the mystery of the eternity of life and with the awareness and a glimpse of the marvelous structure of the existing world, together with the devoted striving to comprehend a portion, be it ever so tiny, of the Reason that manifests itself in nature.On one occasion in 1925 he expressed himself to the novelist Esther Salaman in the following terms:

I want to know how God created this world. I'm not interested in this-or-that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this-or-that element. I want to know His thoughts, the rest are details.That a basic aim of science is to unify all phenomena is affirmed in numerous passages, such as this, from 1936:

The aim of science is, on the one hand, a comprehension, as complete as possible, of the connection between the sense experiences in their totality, and, on the other hand the accomplishment of this aim by use of a minimum of primary concepts and relations. (Seeking, as far as possible, logical unity in the world picture, i.e. paucity in logical elements.) (seeEinstein also makes it clear that science at its best assumes that this goal of unification is realizable:

Certain it is that a conviction, akin to religious feeling, of the rationality or intelligibility of the world lies behind all scientific work of a higher order. This firm belief, a belief bound up with deep feeling in a superior mind that reveals itself in the world of experience, represents my conception of God. In common parlance this may be described as "pantheistic" (Spinoza).And on another occasion:

From the very beginning there has always been present the attempt to find a unifying theoretical basis for all [the] single sciences, consisting of a minimum of concepts and fundamental relationships, from which all the concepts and relationships of the single disciplines might be derived by logical process. This is what we mean by the search for a foundation of the whole of physics. The confident belief that this ultimate goal may be reached is the chief source of the passionate devotion which has always animated the researcher.As for scientific realism, Einstein expresses himself with his usual clarity and brevity:

The belief in an external world independent of the perceiving subject is the basis of all natural science. Since, however, sense perception only gives information of this external world or of "physical reality" indirectly, we can only grasp the latter by speculative means.