On the other hand we may-with Kepler, Spinoza, Einstein and Popper, for example-be concerned primarily with the "intrinsic" or cultural value of intellectual inquiry, intellectual inquiry pursued for its own sake. If so, then we need to recognize-as emphasized by the philosophy of wisdom-that it is knowledge and understanding achieved by people that ultimately matters. "Pure" intellectual inquiry, conceived of in impersonal or institutional terms, is of value in so far as it helps us to achieve that which really has value-our personal knowledge and understanding of our world, our personal curiosity, perceptiveness, capacity to discover that which is of significance in our surroundings, and the extent to which all this enriches our life. The problems of "pure" intellectual inquiry are, in other words, at the most fundamental level, personal and interpersonal problems, problems that we encounter in seeking to enhance our personal knowledge and understanding of the world, our personal perception and appreciation of what is significant and of value in existence. As Einstein once remarked: "Knowledge exists in two forms-lifeless, stored in books, and alive in the consciousness of men. The second form of existence is after all the essential one; the first, indispensable as it may be, occupies only an inferior position"To this I would only add that from the standpoint of "pure" intellectual inquiry it is perhaps the activity, as a part of life, of imaginatively exploring the world, following up our passionate curiosity, the lively encountering of aspects of reality, that is essentially of value. And just as the professional, specialized, institutionalized activities associated with music are designed, ideally, to further our making and enjoying of music, so too the professional, specialized, institutionalized activities associated with science are, ideally, designed to further our exploration and enjoyment of our world.

All this is in marked contrast with the views of those who, like, emphasize the fundamental importance of "objective knowledge", of "knowledge without a knowing subject", of "public knowledge", or of "institutional knowledge", conceived as ends in themselves, rather than as means to the achievement of the end of life of value, via enhancement of personal awareness of the world. In insisting that "pure" science be dissociated from life, intellectual progress being understood in wholly objective, impersonal or institutional terms, the philosophy of knowledge misses out precisely that which matters most, our personal apprehension of the world. As a result of putting this philosophy of impersonal knowledge into practice, a disastrous split develops between the way we personally apprehend or conceive of the world, and the way "science" apprehends or conceives of the world. We fail to exploit science in order to enrich and extend our personal vision of things; and we fail to develop science in such a way that it is amenable to such exploitation. We fail to discover how to use scientific theories as spectacles through which we may, conjecturally, view the world. Instead of emphasizing the priority of the personal problems of understanding we need to solve in order to make such a use of scientific theories, the problems are dismissed as "subjective", the development of impersonal knowledge embodied in scientific theories becoming an end in itself. As a result we become blind to-or ignore-the profound discrepancies that exist between the world as conceived by us in life, and the world as conceived, impersonally, by science. A kind of advanced intellectual schizophrenia in our thinking develops. Theoretical physics, for example, ceases to be, with Einstein, a personal "attempt conceptually to grasp reality as it is thought independently of its being observed", and becomes merely the impersonal, institutional, ritualistic prediction of phenomena, 'the whole thing ... a wretched bungle' which can 'only claim the interest of shopkeepers and engineers'.Personal awareness of what is significant and of value in existence, intellectual passion, curiosity, wonder, all degenerate into nothing more than the possession of information and expert skills, the accumulation of dry knowledge of fact. As a result of dissociating "pure" intellectual inquiry from life, we lose sight of the value which intellectual inquiry has when pursued for its own sake.

Above all, and quite generally, as a result of engaging in, and thinking in terms of, intellectual inquiry as in the first instance the pursuit of impersonal knowledge, we lose sight of those problems which, quite fundamentally, create the need for intellectual inquiry, and which intellectual inquiry ought fundamentally to be helping us to solve. By giving priority to the pursuit of impersonal knowledge, we fail to emphasize the fundamental character of the personal and social problems of our pluralistic world. Intellectual inquiry must then fail to enhance our common understanding of these problems and our common capacity to develop more adequate resolutions to them. Conceiving of things in terms of the pursuit of impersonal knowledge, we fail entirely to see the urgent need to develop intellectual inquiry as the critical fundamentalist tribal discussion of humanity, as a vital part of all our lives, as a personal and social reality, as a part of the world, designed to help us create wiser ways of living, wiser institutions, a wiser world.