4.4 Further issues

What of the other aspects of the problem of non-empirical requirements in science mentioned in the introduction? Here are a few brief remarks concerning some of these further issues.

Most of the other terms used to refer to non-empirical requirements can be straightforwardly related to unity. We have seen that this is true of symmetry and invariance. Non-ad hoc, organic, inwardly perfect and non-aberrant can be interpreted as appealing to unity, and harmonious, beautiful and conceptually coherent can be interpreted as presupposing unity. A dynamical physical theory can be held to be explanatory in character to the extent that it is (1) empirically contentful, and (2) unified.

Simplicity, however, is quite different. The simplicity of a theory can be interpreted as having to do, not with whether the same laws apply throughout the space S, but rather with the nature of the laws, granted that they are the same. Some laws are simpler than others. In order to overcome the objection that simplicity is formulation-dependent it is essential, as in the case of unity, to interpret "simplicity" as applying to the content of theories, and not to their formulation, their axiomatic structure, etc. Theories can only, at best, be partially ordered with respect to degrees of simplicity. Even when two theories are amenable to being assessed with respect to relative simplicity, there is always the problem that a change of variables may reverse the assessment. Let the two theories be (1) y = x, and (2) y = x 2. We judge (1) to be simpler than (2). Let x 2 = z. We now have (1) y = z , and (2) y = z. Now (2) is simpler than (1). Assessment of relative simplicity of two theories may only be unambiguous when restrictions are placed on the form that physical variables can take, so that only linear transformations of the type z = Ax + B (where A and B are constants) are permitted, for example. It is a further great success of the theory presented here that it succeeds in distinguishing sharply between these two aspects of physical theory, the unity and simplicity aspects, and succeeds in explicating both.We can use these two notions to solve the problem of ambiguity of judgement concerning the relative non-empirical merits of Newton's and Einstein's theories of gravitation. Newton's theory is simpler, but Einstein's is more unified in that it eliminates gravitation as a force, and reformulates Newton's first law so that it becomes the assertion that bodies move along geodesics in curved space-time, curvature being caused by mass, or by stress-energy-density more generally. As theoretical physics draws closer to capturing the true theory of everything, it is reasonable to expect that the totality of fundamental physical theory will become increasingly unified and complex.

So far I have stressed that terminological unity and simplicity are irrelevant when it comes to assessing unity and simplicity in a physically significant sense. In scientific practice, however, terminology is chosen so as to reflect physically significant unity and simplicityThus if the content of a theory exhibits certain symmetries, terminology is chosen so that it too exhibits these symmetries, so that if the theory is invariant with respect to position or orientation in space, terminology is chosen which reflects this fact. Once a theory is formulated in such "physically appropriate" terminology (as it may be called), two versions of symmetry operations arise as a result: "active" (which make changes to physical systems) and "passive" (which make corresponding changes to the description of unchanged physical systems). Granted that we formulate physical theories exclusively in such "physically appropriate" terminology, then terminological unity and simplicity comes to reflect physical unity and simplicity, and is thus, to that extent, physically significant.

What of the simplicity and unity of theories in sciences other than fundamental physics? Much needs to be said on this topic; the following brief remarks can serve only as pointers to a more adequate treatment. Solutions to the equations of fundamental physical theory, specifying precisely how increasingly complex physical systems evolve in space and time, rapidly become horrendously complex in character. In carrying out derivations, physicists invariably "simplify" results obtained by discarding variable quantities or higher order terms judged to be insignificant in the physical situations under considerations. Just this is done when NT is "derived" from Einstein's theory, or Kepler's and Galileo's laws of motion are "derived" from NT.The outcome is a range of more or less terminologically simple phenomenological laws of only approximate validity. But the simplicity is not, here, merely pragmatic, since such a law has been "approximately derived" from some fundamental physical theory formulated in a "physically appropriate" way, the "approximate derivation"

showing what the range of applicability of the law is with what degree of accuracy. Even though such laws are incompatible with the fundamental physical theory from which they have been "approximately derived", nevertheless what the "derivations" reveal is that pragmatic simplicity has been obtained by sacrificing strict derivability and precise empirical accuracy, there being nothing here to counter the underlying unity in nature postulated by fundamental physical theory (in so far as it does postulate this). Laws such as these are prevalent throughout phenomenological physics, astrophysics and parts of physical chemistry. Even where such "approximate derivations" cannot be carried through, for large parts of chemistry, and for biology, nevertheless, as I have already remarked, laws and theories of these sciences are constrained by fundamental physics, and must endeavour to be compatible with fundamental physics, at least in the qualified way just indicated in connection with phenomenological physics. Thus, much of the great explanatory power of Darwinian theory stems from the fact that it postulates mechanisms for evolution-random inheritable variation and natural selection-which are capable of designing living things able to pursue the goals of survival and reproductive success in their given environments, these mechanisms nevertheless being compatible with the purposeless cosmos depicted by physics. Biology must accord with physics in much more specific ways as well, in that the mechanisms of inheritance and development must accord with physics, and so too the multitude of processes that take place in living things.