Essentially the same problems-explored by both Popper and Singer-have also been discussed byFinally, Peter Gay, in his marvellous book The Enlightenment: An Interpretation, provides us with a haunting account of the anguish experienced by the thinkers of the Enlightenment in attempting to come to terms with their doubts, their scepticism, as they emerged from the religious tribalism of contemporary Christianity

It is, I hope, clear that all these writers are concerned essentially with the same problem: the difficulties we encounter in coming to terms with something that is essentially desirable, namely social and cultural diversity. One disastrous consequence of specialism is that it disrupts understanding of problems as fundamental as this; the problem is scattered amongst a number of disparate disciplines, and lost sight of. Instead of discussion being organized around the problem, so that contributions such as those of the above writers can fruitfully interact with, and supplement, each other, discussion is organized instead within the disciplines: anthropology, epistemology, political philosophy, history, psychology, history of ideas, fiction. As a result, we fail to discover the interconnections between the contributions; we fail to improve our understanding of the underlying problem. We fail to understand the problems of adolescence as those of moving from a closed to an open society-in part philosophical problems. We fail to appreciate the social, cultural and personal implications of Popper's philosophical and epistemological discussions. We fail to grasp the universal significance of Singer's fiction. We do not see that Popper and Singer are concerned with essentially the same problem. Fromm may be dismissed as pursuing the pseudoscientific discipline of sociocultural-psychoanalytic psychology, instead of being understood as contributing to our understanding of the problems discussed in The Open Society and Its Enemies, and in Feyerabend's "Problems of Empiricism"

Specialism thus prevents us from seeing our fundamental problems. As a result, we fail to see the urgent need to improve our thinking at this level, and the considerable difficulties that arise in connection with this task.

2. It is in the nature of universalism to raise questions and doubts that can be highly awkward for those who wield power in society. In particular, of course, universalism challenges all those who claim to have authoritative answers to fundamental problems-religious and secular centres of power and influence in society. Universalism calls into question cherished beliefs and values, and thus also is liable to collide with public opinion. Powerful social forces, then, will inevitably discourage the development of critical fundamentalist intellectual inquiry-as Socrates, Galileo and Spinoza, for example, found out. Only a society which had, quite generally, taken universalism to heart would encourage the development of critical fundamentalist intellectual inquiry; but of course no such society has as yet come into existence.

The case of specialism is, however, quite different. Specialist scientists and scholars may well be quite content to let non-academic authorities decide fundamental issues, scientific, academic inquiry confining itself to solving those specialized, technical problems whose solutions are required by those who wield power in society. Critical fundamentalist issues in any case lie beyond the reach of specialist intellectual standards and concerns. Specialism thus robs the scientist and scholar of the capacity, from a professional standpoint, to criticize fundamentalist decisions made on the basis of power in society-except where those in authority are foolish enough to transgress specialist standards and results.

3. Specialism is especially appealing to those who uphold what may be called "oracular" conceptions of reason-according to which, reason, ideally, is something that reaches decisions authoritatively for us, rather than being something which helps us to decide. 47 Any academic who upholds such an oracular conception of reason (or method) quite clearly cannot pursue inquiry in accordance with universalism. For that would involve the appalling prospect of academic professors deciding authoritatively for the rest of us how fundamental questions are to be answered, how we should live, what is of value in life, what our life problems are and how they are to be resolved. This is a modern version of Plato's vision of the dictatorship of the philosopher-king. If one is to hold on to an oracular conception of reason or method (which includes of course appeals to evidence), without incurring the charge of becoming a Platonic philosopher-king, a prophetic dictator, it becomes necessary to restrict the field of one's research to some specialized, limited, factual, value-neutral domain over which, a bit more plausibly, one may seek to claim authoritative expertise. One must become, in other words, a specialist, and implement specialism.

The proper response to this is, of course, to reject all such oracular conceptions of method (whether empiricist or rationalist) in all fields, in the contexts of both specialized and universalist inquiry. Even the most secure results of specialized research ought not to be held to be so secure that they are inherently immune to all possibility of being criticized usefully by non-specialists. And when it comes to exploration of fundamental questions, there may well be some individuals who deserve greater attention than others, and who are, to that extent, experts, but such individuals cannot conceivably be held to speak authoritatively for the rest of us about fundamental issues, as if Platonic prophets or popes whose pronouncements must be taken on trust.