There are, however, marked differences: "normative naturalism" is not committed to physicalism, and does not postulate the hierarchy of aims and methods of AOE, which makes the rational assessment of low-level aims and methods possible. I might add that Laudan's "normative naturalism" is derived from AOE, which was first expounded in a colloquium I gave at the University of Pittsburgh in 1972, chaired by Laudan, the text of which became my paper "The Rationality of Scientific Discovery"Rescher has defended the view that science makes metaphysical presuppositions (see; his views also differ substantially from AOE. For an excellent survey of methodological views, including those of Laudan and Rescher (but excluding AOE) see22. At this point I confess that in The Comprehensibility of the UniverseI give a third argument for accepting meta-knowability which does, perhaps, contain a whiff of circularity, in that it appeals to the apparent success of science. This suffices, I now think, to make this argument circular. 23. What justifies the claim that physicalism has been more fruitful for theoretical physics than any rival idea? This is justified by the point made in section 7.2. All new, revolutionary, fundamental physical theories have been accepted because they (a) have brought greater unity to physics, and (b) have been more empirically successful, than any rivals-(a) being just as important as (b). In other words, the persisting non-empirical requirement for acceptance of revolutionary theory has been enhanced exemplification of physicalism (as far as theoretical physics as a whole is concerned). What irony that scientific revolutions-just that which convincedthat there are ruptures in science with nothing theoretical surviving each rupture-actually demonstrate just the opposite: the persistent and increasingly successful search for unity, the assumption of underlying unity being repeatedly reinforced by each successive revolution. It may be asked: But how can revolutionary theories reinforce physicalism when the totality of physical theory has always, up till now, clashed with physicalism?

The answer: If physicalism is true, then all physical theories that only unify a restricted range of phenomena, must be false. Granted the truth of physicalism, and granted that theoretical physics advances by putting forward theories of limited but ever increasing empirical scope, then it follows that physics will advance from one false theory to another, all theories being false until a unified theory of everything is achieved (which just might be true). The successful pursuit of physicalism requires progressive increase in both empirical scope and unity of the totality of fundamental physical theory. It is just this which the history of physics, from Galileo to today, exemplifies-thus demonstrating the unique fruitfulness of physicalism. 24. For further details of the argument for AOE, see, inspired by, does argue for changing methods of science within an SE view. But because of the anti-realist and SE character of his view, its lack of the hierarchical "meta-methodological" character of AOE, Laudan cannot do justice to the idea that new aims-and-methods need to be appraised so that those selected improve on earlier aims-and-methods, there being positive feedback between improving knowledge and improving knowledge-about-how-to-improve-knowledge-a key feature of the rationality of science, according to AOE, and one which helps account for the explosive growth of modern science. 26. See note 2 for references to recent attempts to solve the problem within the framework of SE. 27. Galileo's laws of terrestrial motion and Kepler's laws of planetary motion are contradicted by Newtonian theory, in turn contradicted by special and general relativity. The whole of classical physics is contradicted by quantum theory, in turn contradicted by quantum field theory. Science advances from one false theory to another. Viewed from an SE perspective, this seems discouraging and is often called "the pessimistic induction". Viewed from an AOE perspective, as I have already mentioned, this mode of advance is wholly encouraging, since it is required by AOE. Granted physicalism, the only way a dynamical theory can be precisely true of any life of agricultural Bantu tribes in Central Africa. Turnbull describes just such a rigid, tabooridden, superstitious, compulsive, fearful, ritualistic way of life. Turnbull's really remarkable discovery, however, is that all this is entirely absent in the Pygmy hunting and gathering tribal way of life. The Pygmies' lives are imbued with a quite extraordinary spontaneity, grace and trust, there being a complete absence of superstition, compulsive ritual or fearful observance of taboo. Turnbull argues, in my view entirely convincingly, that it is the development of agriculture which is responsible for this dramatic difference in the whole way of life. Hunting and gathering tribes can afford to live spontaneously, from day to day, trusting in the forest to provide food for tomorrow. Agricultural tribes, on the contrary, live in a state of constant battle with the environment and must perform persistent, long-term agricultural work before food and reward are eventually forthcoming.to the conclusion, from a consideration of archaeological evidence, that early hunting and gathering tribes "enjoyed relatively high standards of comfort and security"