And, on another occasion, as we have already seen:

Physics is an attempt to grasp reality as it is thought independently of its being observed.It is all summed up succinctly in a letter to Cornelius Lanczos in 1942:

You are the only person I know who has the same attitude toward physics as I have: belief in the comprehension of reality through something basically simple and unified. (All this might seem more than enough to demolish decisively the views of those, like Fine and Popper, who hold that Einstein upheld some version of standard empiricism. Unfortunately it is not. In all the above quotations, Einstein can be interpreted as asserting no more than that he, and science, seek to discover, and presuppose the existence of, a unified structure to the universe, in the context of discovery. According to this interpretation, Einstein would hold that, in the context of justification, nothing must be permanently assumed about the nature of the universe, the sole aim being empirical adequacy, empirical considerations alone in the end deciding what is to constitute theoretical scientific knowledge.

On this issue-the crucial issue which divides off standard from aim-oriented empiricism-Einstein seems to have wavered. Consider the following passage:

Can we hope to be guided safely by experience at all when there exist theories (such as classical mechanics) which to a large extent do justice to experience, without getting to the root of the matter? I answer without hesitation that there is, in my opinion, a right way, and that we are capable of finding it. Our experience hitherto justifies us in believing that nature is the realization of the simplest conceivable mathematical ideas. I am convinced that we can discover by means of purely mathematical constructions the concepts and the laws connecting them with each other, which furnish the key to the understanding of natural phenomena. Experience may suggest the appropriate mathematical concepts, but they most certainly cannot be deduced from it. Experience remains, of course, the sole criterion of the physical utility of a mathematical construction. But the creative principle resides in mathematics. In a certain sense, therefore, I hold it true that pure thought can grasp reality, as the ancients dreamed.This comes tantalizingly close to aim-oriented empiricism. A central tenet of aim-oriented empiricism is that we are rationally entitled to assume that the universe is knowable-there being some fallible, non-mechanical but rational method of discovery available to us-the knowability of the universe implying its comprehensibility. It is just this key element of aim-oriented empiricism which Einstein asserts here, his epistemological and methodological instincts as usual getting almost everything right. (The point is also brilliantly made in one of Einstein's most famous sayings: "Raffiniert ist der Herrgott, aber boshaft ist er nicht"-"God is sublime but not malicious".) Unfortunately, in the quotation given above, the italicized sentence provides Popper or Fine with the perfect excuse for interpreting the passage as a defence of standard empiricism. One can argue, of course, that the whole passage only really makes sense if interpreted as asserting: experience remains the sole criterion of physical utility granted that we restrict our attention to simple, unified theories. This would of course violate standard empiricism. But the text, as it stands, is sufficiently ambiguous to leave the matter undecided. Consider next the following passage:

The very fact that the totality of our sense experiences is such that by means of thinking (operations with concepts, and the creation and use of definite functional relations between them, and the coordination of sense experiences to these concepts) it can be put in order, this fact is one which leaves us in awe, but which we shall never understand. One may say "the eternal mystery of the world is its comprehensibility". It is one of the great realizations of Immanuel Kant that the postulation of a real external world would be senseless without this comprehensibility.

In speaking here of "comprehensibility", the expression is used in its most modest sense. It implies: the production of some sort of order among sense impressions, this order being produced by the creation of general concepts, relations between these concepts, and by definite relations of some kind between the concepts and sense experience. It is in this sense that the world of our sense experiences is comprehensible. The fact that it is comprehensible is a miracle.

In my opinion, nothing can be said a priori concerning the manner in which the concepts are to be formed and connected, and how we are to coordinate them to sense experiences. In guiding us in the creation of such an order of sense experiences, success alone is the determining factor. All that is necessary is to fix a set of rules, since without such rules the acquisition of knowledge in the desired sense would be impossible. One may compare these rules with the rules of a game in which, while the rules themselves are arbitrary, it is their rigidity alone which makes the game possible. However, the fixation will never be final. It will have validity only for a special field of application (i.e., there are no final categories in the sense of Kant).