) If one has acquired an intuitive understanding of a realistic theory, then one may well be able to "visualize" what the theory is about: to this extent, visualizability is methodologically significant, according to AOE, but once again derives from the demand for unity, via the demand for realism. MAI, by contrast, once again, is much more open-ended about visualizability, and makes no attempt to relate it to the demand for unity.

McAllister claims that opposition to orthodox quantum theory (OQT), by Schrödinger, Einstein and others, stemmed from the loss of visualizability and determinism associated with the new theory. But this overlooks the key, entirely legitimate objection to OQT, namely its loss of microrealism, due to the failure to solve the quantum wave/ particle problem. Because it failed to specify a consistent quantum ontology, OQT had to be developed as a theory which can, at most, make predictions about the results of performing measurements on quantum systems-measurement being described classically. But this in turn meant that OQT is, quite essentially, made up of two quite different parts stitched together in a grossly ad hoc way, namely (1) the quantum part, and (2) some part of classical physics for a treatment of measurement. Despite its immense empirical success, OQT is still today deeply and genuinely problematic, to the point, almost, of being unacceptable, because of its grossly ad hoc character, due to its lack of micro-realism (see. The mature Einstein was well aware that this is the basic objection to OQT, not lack of visualizability or loss of determinism, as we saw in Chapter 3. Elsewhere I have argued that the grossly ad hoc character of OQT, stemming from its lack of micro-realism, provides us with a general argument against instrumentalism and for realism. I have also suggested how the quantum wave/ particle problem may be solved, and how a fully micro-realistic version of quantum theory may be developed, free of any reference to measurement or classical physics in its basic postulates, able to recover all the successful predictive content of OQT, but also making experimental predictions different from OQT for as yet unperformed experiments (see. (This was done in an attempt to put the rational, but fallible, method of discovery of AOE into scientific practice.) There are, of course, other attempts at developing fully micro-realistic versions of quantum theory (seeEinstein's mature objection to OQT had to do with the lack of realism of the theory, but he did also, especially earlier, object to its lack of determinism. But here, too, there is a methodologically significant issue at stake, related once again to the demand for unity. A realistic version of quantum theory must be unified, first with special relativity, and then, ultimately, with general relativity. This is a much graver problem, granted probabilistic quantum theory, than it is if quantum theory is deterministic. The demand for unity speaks against probabilistic quantum theory-but not decisively: nature may well be probabilistic, and the task may be to develop probabilistic versions of special and general relativity

As for abstractness, this is, for AOE, without methodological significance, except that, as physical theory draws closer to capturing physicalism, it is almost bound to specify entities increasingly remote from those of ordinary experience. We begin with corpuscles, minute billiard balls, in the seventeenth century; these then transmute into point particles that interact by means of forces; these, in turn, transmute into classical fields, into quantum fields, into curved space-time, into superstrings in tendimensional space-time-entities increasingly remote from the familiar billiard ball.

We have seen, so far, that AOE recognizes, ultimately, just one nonempirical criterion, unity or compatibility with physicalism, 5 whereas MAI recognizes many, and makes no attempt to show that these all devolve from just one basic criterion. But I come now to a non-empirical criterion which AOE holds to be absolutely central, but which MAI does not even recognize as an aesthetic criterion at all: explanatory power.

Explanatory power is an ambiguous concept. We may hold that T 1 has more explanatory power than T 2 if (1) T 1 has greater empirical content than T 2 , or if (2) T 1 has greater unity than T 2 even though it has the same empirical content. Let us call these type (1) and type (2) explanatory power respectively.

We need also to recognize that criteria legitimately employed in science to assess theories can be put into three categories: (a) empirical, (b) empirical-dependent, and (c) non-empirical. By (a) I mean simply the predictive success of the theory in question; by (b) I mean properties of theories that have to do with how amenable they are to being assessed empirically, such as testability and empirical content; and by (c) I mean properties of theories that have nothing directly to do with empirical success but which are deemed to be indicative of truth, or of potential empirical success. Type (1) explanatory power is a typical type (b) property of theories. But, according to AOE, type (2) explanatory power is the key type (c) non-empirical property of theories from which, as we have seen, all others, such as symmetry, simplicity or metaphysical allegiance, arise. In seeking to acquire knowledge about the world, we actively hunt for clues as to the kind of universe we are in, and hence the kind of theories we need to develop. The big clue that we have (apparently) discovered, is that the universe is more or less comprehensible in some way or other, it being possible to discover explanations for phenomena; this is enshrined in theses of comprehensibility and physical comprehensibility, at levels 5 and 4 of Figure 2.1. The level 5 thesis of comprehensibility is the bold conjecture that the universe is perfectly comprehensible in some way or other-the universe being such that there is some one kind of explanation for all phenomena, couched in terms of God, a cosmic purpose (which everything is designed to fulfil), a cosmic programme, a unified physical entity, or something else. From Galileo on, science has, in effect, made the even bolder conjecture that the universe is physically comprehensible, at level 4, and comprehensible in terms of the best available blueprint, at level 3. Type (2) explanatory power, to repeat, is the key type (c) non-empirical criterion of theory choice, from which all other type (c) criteria arise. If any property of theories cries out to be the aesthetic property of beauty, which scientists quite properly take note of as being methodologically significant, it is type (2) explanatory power.