

Popper's diagnosis is of fundamental importance. However, in the midst of his ferocious determination to establish once and for all the intellectual disreputability and appalling potential human destructiveness of views which value the tribal way of life, Popper neglects to consider the possibility that there is indeed much to value, potentially, in the cohesiveness of the tribal way of life which humanity-science, reason and civilization-cannot do without. 12 It is just this possibility that is affirmed here. I shall argue that our departure from the human compactness and unity of tribal life does indeed involve serious loss. Mere pluralism is not enough. It is essential that we develop a common unified view of the world and ourselves through cultural and social diversity if there is to be mutual learning, understanding, and cooperation through diversity-minimal requirements for reason and for civilization. Only universalism can do justice to these apparently conflicting requirements of unity and diversity. In our emergence from tribal life into the modern world a basic task confronting us is to create and develop unity within diversity: only by putting universalism into practice can we achieve this in a just, equable, genuinely rational and humane way. Popper's ideal of the "Open Society" needs to be replaced by the ideal advocated in this essay of the "Fundamental Society". It is precisely our failure to establish universalism on a worldwide basis that is responsible for so much suffering in modern times, and which indeed at present threatens us all. (I refer here to our present worldwide incapacity to cope with fundamental problems posed by such things as the population explosion; the continuing rapid depletion of vital, finite natural resources; widespread poverty and malnutrition in the developing world; global warming; the proliferation, indeed the mere existence, of nuclear weapons, which threatens to engulf us all in the nuclear holocaust. A critical fundamentalist world order is, almost by definition, a world order capable of recognizing its fundamental problems and, where possible, developing and putting into practice, in a cooperative fashion, just, humane, effective solutions.)

Popper's failure to recognize the vital need to create or develop a version of tribal unity within the diversity, complexity and sheer immensity of the modern world, in order to preserve and develop reason, mutual cooperation, humanity and civilization, is intimately connected with his analogous failure to recognize the vital role that fundamental unifying assumptions play in science, and in academic inquiry in general. Scientific, academic inquiry has basic presuppositions about what sort of world this is, and what is important or of value in social life, built into its whole intellectual-institutional structure, built into the priorities for research, built into its implicit methodology. According to universalism, these basic presuppositions need to be explicitly articulated and scrutinized-thus creating a tradition of discussion of presupposed solutions to fundamental problems-if scientific, academic inquiry is to be genuinely rational and rigorous, of maximum human value and use. Only by putting universalism into scientific, academic practice can we do justice to-and develop-the inherent rationality, the intellectually progressive character and the human value of the best of scientific, academic work and thought. As we shall see below, Popper fails to characterize adequately the rationality and progressive character of science-in that, for example, he fails to solve the problem of inductionjust because he fails to do justice to the need for fundamental metaphysical and evaluative assumptions persisting through scientific revolutions, scientific diversity.

The Open Society and Its Enemies fails to characterize a genuinely rational society; The Logic of Scientific Discovery) fails to characterize a genuinely rational science: both failures are by-products of Popper's basic failure to articulate and advocate the hierarchical structure of universalism, so essential for genuinely rational, cooperative problem solving and inquiry in life as well as thought.

Having argued that we need to recognize, quite generally, that our thinking goes on in the world, presupposing a view of the world and a view of what is of value in life, I am of course eager to acknowledge that my advocacy of universalism in this chapter is intimately bound up with a view of what sort of world this is and what is of value in life-a broad, general, fundamental answer to the fundamental questions (1) and (3) above. As to the material universe, I hold a view not too dissimilar from the overall conception of the world implicit in much of modern science-a view of the world which does justice to the probable truth of Einstein's remark that "all our science, measured against reality, is primitive and childlike-and yet it is [one of] the most precious thing. I recognize, of course, the intellectual legitimacy of conceptions of the world-such as animistic and religious views-very different from that of modern science. Critical fundamentalist inquiry acknowledges such rivals, and retreats to a more modest "common sense" view of the world, designed to be indifferent between these rival, explanatorily fundamental views, so that there may be a common, agreed base, in terms of which the merits of the rival explanatorily fundamental views may be discussed. (Universalism recognizes, in other words, that, in certain contexts, and for certain purposes, the epistemologically fundamental may differ from what is presumed to be ontologically and explanatorily fundamental.)