And quite generally, given any accepted fundamental physical theory, T, there will always be endlessly many ad hoc rivals which meet with all the empirical success of T, make untested predictions that differ from T, are empirically successful where T is ostensibly refuted, and successfully predict phenomena about which T is silent (as a result of independently testable and corroborated hypotheses being added on).

As most physicists and philosophers of physics would accept, two criteria are employed in physics in deciding what theories to accept and reject: (1) empirical criteria, and (2) criteria that have to do with the simplicity, unity or explanatory character of the theories in question.is absolutely indispensable, to such an extent that there are endlessly many theories empirically more successful than accepted theories, all of which are ignored because of their lack of unity. Now comes the crucial point. In persistently accepting unifying theories (even though ostensibly refuted), and excluding infinitely many empirically more successful, unrefuted, disunified or aberrant rival theories, science in effect makes a big assumption about the nature of the universe, to the effect that it is such that some yet-to-be-discovered, more or less unified physical theory is true, and no seriously disunified theory is true, 10 however empirically successful it may appear to be for a time. Furthermore, without some such big assumption as this, the empirical method of science would collapse. Science would be drowned in an infinite ocean of empirically successful disunified theories.If scientists only accepted theories that postulate atoms, and persistently rejected theories that postulate different basic physical entities, such as fields-even though many field theories can easily be, and have been, formulated which are even more empirically successful than the atomic theories-the implications would surely be quite clear. Scientists would in effect be assuming that the world is made up of atoms, all other possibilities being ruled out. The atomic assumption would be built into the way the scientific community accepts and rejects theories-built into the implicit methods of the community, methods which would include rejecting all theories that postulate entities other than atoms, whatever their empirical success might be. The scientific community would accept the assumption that the universe is such that no non-atomic theory is true.

Just the same holds for a scientific community which rejects all disunified or aberrant rivals to accepted theories, even though these rivals would be even more empirically successful if they were considered. Such a community in effect makes the assumption that the universe is such that no disunified theory is true. Or rather, more accurately, such a community makes the assumption that "no disunified theory is true that is not entailed by a true unified theory (plus, possibly, true relevant initial and boundary conditions)". (A true unified theory entails infinitely many approximate, true, disunified theories.) Let us call this assumption "physicalism".

That physicalism is metaphysical can be shown as follows. Physicalism asserts, "not T 1 and not T 2  and not T  ", where T 1 , T 2 ,  T  are infinitely many disunified rivals to accepted physical theories. Physicalism cannot be empirically verified, because this would require that all of T 1 , T 2 ,  T  are falsified, but as there are infinitely many of these theories, each requiring a different falsifying experiment, this cannot be done. Equally, physicalism cannot be falsified, as this requires the verification of at least one of T 1 , or T 2 ,  or T  , which cannot be done, as physical theories cannot be verified empirically. Hence physicalism, being neither verifiable nor falsifiable, is metaphysical.

Thus in persistently rejecting empirically more successful but disunified rivals to accepted physical theories, science makes a persistent metaphysical assumption about the world, namely physicalism. Standard empiricism (SE), and all the above doctrines that include SE as a component, which hold that science makes no persistent metaphysical assumption, are thus untenable.

Let us call the view that science presupposes physicalism "presuppositionism". Presuppositionism is more rigorous than all the above versions of SE entirely independent of any justification for accepting physicalism as a part of scientific knowledge (that is in addition to the one given above). In saying this, I am appealing to the following, wholly uncontroversial, requirement for rigour:

The principle of intellectual rigour (PIR): In order to be rigorous, it is necessary that assumptions that are substantial, influential and problematic be made explicit-so that they can be criticized, so that alternatives may be developed and assessed, with the aim of improving the assumptions.All versions of SE fail to satisfy PIR in just the way in which presuppositionism does satisfy PIR. Presuppositionism makes the assumption of physicalism explicit (and so criticizable and, we may hope, improvable), while all versions of SE deny that science does make any such assumption as physicalism. Thus, quite independent of any claim to solve the problem of induction, presuppositionism is more rigorous, and thus more acceptable, than any of the above versions of SE. And this is the case even though presuppositionism can provide no justification for accepting physicalism. It is, indeed, above all when we have no reason whatsoever for supposing physicalism is true that it becomes all the more important to implement PIR, and make the probably false assumption of physicalism explicit, so that it can be critically assessed, so that alternatives can be considered, in the hope that a thesis nearer the truth can be discovered.