

In order to make clear what is at stake here, I need to appeal to the four rules of rational problem solving of the last chapter. I shall call these rules, which constitute an improved version of Popper's critical rationalism, "problem-solving rationality":

1. Articulate, and try to improve the articulation of, the problem to be solved. 2. Propose and critically assess possible solutions. 3. When necessary, break up the basic problem to be solved into a number of preliminary, simpler, analogous, subordinate or specialized problems (to be tackled in accordance with rules 1 and 2), in an attempt to work gradually towards a solution to the basic problem to be solved. 4. Interconnect attempts to solve basic and specialized problems, so that basic problem solving may guide, and be guided by, specialized problem solving. 13

Popper's critical rationalism consists of rules 1 and 2; problem-solving rationality improves on this by adding on rules 3 and 4, which become relevant when we are confronted by some especially recalcitrant problem-such as the problem of understanding the nature of the universe, or the problem of creating a civilized world-which can only be solved gradually and progressively, bit by bit, and not all at once.Popper was too hostile to specialization to emphasize the need for rule 3; he did not appreciate that the evils of specialization can be counteracted by implementing rule 4. It might seem that in moving from scientific method to critical and problem-solving rationality we lose the idea of learning from experience; but this is not so. Problem-solving rationality, as enshrined in the above four rules, is a method of learning from experience. Experience is what we acquire through trying out various possible solutions to the problem we wish to solve, and discovering that these possibilities more or less fail. Consider, for example, a problem of action, a technological or political problem, perhaps: in criticizing a proposed solution we may well appeal to the (adverse) outcome of attempting to put the solution into practice; that is, we appeal to experience. Experience, in this broad sense, is what we acquire through trying to do things, trying to solve problems: it is a generalization of the notion of experience as this arises in connection with science-observation and experimentation. Problem-solving rationality might also be called "problem-solving empiricism"; it is as much a generalization of scientific empiricism as it is of scientific rationality.

These four rules, though by no means sufficient for rationality, 15 are certainly necessary for it. No mode of inquiry can hope to be rational which systematically violates any of these rules. In a moment we shall see that academic inquiry as it exists in the main at present, devoted to the pursuit of knowledge, systematically violates three of these four elementary, almost banal, entirely uncontroversial, rules of reason.

Two preliminary points now need to be made. First, in order to create a more civilized, enlightened world, the problems that we need to solve are, fundamentally, problems of living rather than problems of knowledge. It is what we do (or refrain from doing) that matters, and not just what we know. Even where new knowledge or technology is needed, in connection with agriculture or medicine for example, it is always what this enables us to do that solves the problem of living.

Second, in order to make progress towards a sustainable, civilized world we need to learn how to resolve our conflicts in more cooperative ways than at present. A group acts cooperatively in so far as all members of the group share responsibility for what is done, and for deciding what is done, proposals for action, for resolution of problems and conflicts, being judged on their merits from the standpoint of the interests of the members of the group (or the group as a whole), there being no permanent leadership or delegation of power.Competition is not opposed to cooperation if it proceeds within a framework of cooperation, as it does ideally within science. There are of course degrees of cooperativeness, from its absence, all-out violence, at one extreme, through settling of conflicts by means of threat, agreed procedures such as voting, via bargaining, to all-out cooperativeness at the other extreme. If we are to develop a sustainable, civilized world we need to move progressively away from the violent end of this spectrum towards the cooperative end.

Granted, then, that the task of academic inquiry is to put the four rules of problem-solving rationality into practice in such a way as to help humanity learn how to make progress towards a civilized, enlightened world, the primary intellectual tasks must be:

1. To articulate, and try to improve the articulation of, those social problems of living we need to solve in order to make progress towards a better world.

2. To propose and critically assess possible, and actual, increasingly cooperative social actions-these actions to be assessed for their capacity to resolve human problems and conflicts, thus enhancing the quality of human life.