Amongst other things, universalism amounts to a reply to social and cultural relativism. Like relativism, universalism acknowledges the existence and value of social, cultural and intellectual diversity. Unlike relativism, universalism recognizes that we all live in a common world in which we all have a real value, and that we all need to learn from one another so that mutual understanding and cooperation may flourish-so that what is of value in all our lives, potentially and actually, may flourish. The existence of a multiplicity of cultures need not prevent us from recognizing our common humanity, our common value, since it is at least possible for this multiplicity to be interlaced with and unified by a common acceptance of universalism.

Adoption of universalism is especially important for societies and cultures in the developing world. For in learning from the industrially advanced West-in acquiring the science, technology and industry of the West-there is always the grave danger that the indigenous culture and social order will simply be annihilated, as opposed to being helped to develop and flourish.A developing society can only avoid this danger by articulating, at a fundamental level, basic presuppositions, values and problems of the society, so that it becomes possible to discover how to develop these presuppositions and values, to solve these problems, in the new social and cultural circumstances made possible by the importation of Western ideas and techniques. Only in this way can such a society employ these ideas and techniques discriminatingly, for its own best purposes, instead of becoming a hollow imitation of the Western way of life. In addition, of course, the industrially advanced West has a special responsibility, in its interactions with the developing world, to construe its own social and cultural order in universalist (or critical fundamentalist) terms. Only cooperative universalism can enable a mutually desirable kind of learning to go on in both directions.

Analogous considerations arise in connection with education. The most profound, instinctive and passionate fundamentalist thinkers are of course very young children, since all children must, as a practical necessity, arrive at working answers to the four fundamental questions in order to become human. If education is to develop, and not annihilate, instinctively fundamentalist childish thought, then education must itself be organized along universalist (or critical fundamentalist) lines.Only those teachers who learn from their pupils really educate.To sum up: critical fundamentalist inquiry does justice to the Socratic and Kantian idea that reason forms a basis for the unity of mankind, in such a way as to encourage the flourishing of desirable kinds of diversity within this unity; it might be called "the tribal discussion of humanity". Of course, universalism cannot of itself vanquish tyranny, exploitation, manipulation, war, terrorism, crime. Universalism does, however, hold out the hope that if it is actively promoted in our personal, social, intellectual, economic and political lives wherever possible, then the spirit and practice of mutual cooperation between people may gradually grow, thus enabling us gradually to dismantle those social and cultural arrangements which tend to breed misunderstanding and mistrust, manipulation and exploitation, the use and abuse of power, the dreadful spiral of threat, counter-threat and violence.

So much for my preliminary exposition of universalism. I turn now to a consideration of the rival doctrine of specialism.

9.3 Specialism

For most scientists, scholars and educationalists today, specialism is a much more familiar doctrine than universalism: my exposition of specialism can therefore be much briefer. Specialism, unlike universalism, is almost exclusively a view of professional, expert, scientific, academic inquiry-even though this view, being embodied in so much presentday scientific, academic practice, has far-reaching consequences for all our personal, social lives. In complete contrast to universalism, specialism insists that only the specialized, technical problems of the various academic disciplines deserve serious intellectual attention. In order to be capable of serious scientific or scholarly treatment, in other words, a problem must satisfy certain conditions. It must be capable of being given an agreed, precise formulation. The problem must have an objective character, in that experts agree as to how the problem is to be formulated. The nature of the problem must not depend on such subjective, personal or idiosyncratic matters as mood, feelings, personal desires, attitudes or convictions. There must exist agreed procedures for tackling the problem. Above all, there must be general agreement as to what counts as the solution. It must be possible for the problem to receive a definitive solution. Academically respectable problems must, in short, have many of the characteristics of puzzles-chess or crossword puzzles, for example-as emphasized by Kuhn in connection with what he has called "normal" science). Such problems arise quite essentially within the context of specialized disciplines, where there are agreed methods, results, assumptions and procedures. It is precisely by excluding all that is vague, ambiguous, controversial, metaphysical or philosophical that such academically respectable problems can be formulated or created. In order to be in a position to understand, solve and assess proposed solutions to such problems, one needs to be an expert, with specialized knowledge of the relevant discipline, its methods and results. It is not in general necessary to have broad intellectual or cultural sympathies and understanding. By and large, ignorance of social, political, religious, moral and philosophical issues lying beyond the scope of his discipline does not in any way hamper or disqualify the expert in his professional work. A "mere" expert or specialist can be as well equipped as anyone to make outstanding contributions to his discipline.