It is important to note that this third non-empirical requirement plays a crucial role in science, especially in physics, to the extent, even, of persistently overriding empirical requirements. Given any accepted physical theory, T, however successful empirically, it will always be possible to concoct endlessly many empirically more successful theories, T 1 , T 2 , etc., if non-empirical requirements can be ignored. T will make endlessly many predictions concerning phenomena not yet observed. Rivals to T can be concocted by modifying T in ad hoc ways so that each rival makes a different prediction for some unobserved phenomenon. Then independently testable and corroborated hypotheses can be added to these rivals, the result being a series of theories, T 1 , T 2 , etc., which have all the empirical success of T, and have excess empirical content over T, this excess content being empirically corroborated. T 1 , T 2 , etc., are thus empirically more successful than T. Furthermore, almost all accepted physical theories run into empirical difficulties for some phenomena and are, on the face of it, refuted. T 1 , T 2 , etc., can be further modified in an entirely ad hoc, arbitrary fashion, so that these theories predict correctly the phenomena that ostensibly refute T, so that T 1 , T 2 , etc., are, in addition, empirically successful where T is refuted. In scientific practice, of course, these rivals to T, much more empirically successful than T, are never considered at all because of their failure to satisfy non-empirical requirements. The fact that such empirically more successful theories are persistently ignored because of their unacceptably ad hoc, complex, disunified character means that non-empirical considerations are persistently overriding empirical considerations in physics. 1 Non-empirical considerations thus play an irreplaceable and fundamental role in science. But what is this mysterious non-empirical feature of simplicity, unity, etc., that any acceptable scientific theory must possess? This is the problem I set out to solve in this chapter.

It deserves to be noted that this is an absolutely fundamental problem in the philosophy of science. The solution is required for (a) a specification of scientific method, and (b) the solution to the problem of induction. Both points are demonstrated by the point made above, namely that non-empirical considerations persistently override empirical considerations when it comes to the acceptance of scientific theories.

Non-empirical considerations can have a purely pragmatic role in science: in certain contexts, we choose one formulation over another, or even one theory over another, not because we judge our choice to be more likely to be true, but because it is such that the equations are easier to solve, it is easier to extract useful predictions from the choice we make. Here, I ignore such pragmatic considerations, at least initially, and concentrate exclusively on non-empirical requirements judged to be indicative of truth or knowledge (however fallibly).

The following seven aspects of the problem can be distinguished:

(1) The terminological problem: How can simplicity, unity (etc.) be significant notions, having methodological significance, when the question of whether a theory is simple or complex, unified or disunified, will depend crucially on how the theory in question is formulated? A change of formulation can turn a simple theory into a complex one, and vice versa.

(2) How can degrees of simplicity, unity (etc.) be assessed? (3) How many diierent features of theories are involved? The plethora of terms used by scientists and philosophers of science in this context does not inspire confidence that people know what they are talkinggabout. (4) How can one do justice to the fact that conceptions of simplicity or unity evolve with evolving knowledge? Three of Newton's fourr rules of reasoning concern simplicity, and yet Newton's notions are diierent from those of a modern physicist. (5) How can one do justice to ambiguity of judgements concerning the relative simplicity or unity of theories? Thus Newton's theory of gravitation seems in one way much simpler than Einstein's, but in another way more complex, or at least less unified. (6) How is persistent preference for simple or unified theories in science, even against the evidence, to be justified? This is, it should be noted, the problem of induction. Solve this, and the problem of induction is solved.What implications does the solution to these problems have for science itself?

By far the most serious item on this list is (1). IIshall concentrate on (1), and at the end will make a few remarks aboutRichard Feynman has provided the following amusing illustration of problemConsider an appallingly complex universe governed by 10 10 quite diierent, distinct laws. Even in such a universe, the true "theory of everything" can be expressed in the dazzlingly simple, unified form::AA==0. Suppose the 10 10 distinct laws of the universeeare:

(1))FF==ma;

The true "theory of everything" of this universe can now be formulated as:A=0. (This is true if and only if each A r =0, for r=1, 2, 10 10 .)