The outcome of all this will of course be ever increasing piles of completely unusable bricks, slates, wire, pipes, etc.-and no house will be built at all. And if we complain, we will no doubt be met with indignation in that each specialist has indeed performed his task with skill and expertise.

The "house" that intellectual inquiry as a whole should help us build is, I suggest, a life of value-a rich and fulfilling life, a life in which we can share friendship, love, happiness, beauty, creative work, joy in being alive. Our "fundamental" problems are the problems we encounter in our lives in seeking to discover, experience, participate in and help create that which is of value. The basic rationale for the whole of intellectual inquiry is to help us to articulate and solve these fundamental problems of living. All intellectual problems are subordinate to these fundamental personal and interpersonal problems of living. The problems of mathematics, logic, philosophy, theoretical physics, cosmology, molecular biology, neurology-all these need to be understood as sub-problems of our fundamental personal and interpersonal problems of living.

It is, of course, not the case that intellectual inquiry is pursued only for pragmatic reasons, as a means to the realization of non-intellectual, practical ends. Intellectual inquiry is also pursued for its own sake. Intellectual inquiry is, in other words, itself a part of life, enriching life directly when pursued for its own sake, like music or poetry. It is, for example, of the essence of life of value that we are perceptive and curious about our surroundings-in touch with our environment. "Pure" research in physics, say, or cosmology, geology, history or anthropology, amounts simply to a cooperative following-up of such personal perceptiveness and curiosity. From the standpoint of pure intellectual inquiry, it is the curiosity, the imaginative explorations, the thoughts and feelings, the knowledge and understanding, the intellectual honesty and passion, the problem solving, of people in society as a part of life, that really matters. It is our shared exploration of our world, as an aspect of life of value, that is important. It is the personal knowledge and understanding of our world that we have ourselves developed, integrated into our lives, that really matters. Pure intellectual inquiry is, in other words, at the most fundamental level, personal and interpersonal in character, a part of life. The impersonal or institutional aspects of pure intellectual inquiry exist simply as a means to an end: to aid personal and interpersonal curiosity, wonder, knowledge and understanding, as a vital aspect of our personal and social lives. Thus both "pure" and "pragmatic" intellectual inquiry seek to contribute to the richness, the value, of our shared lives here on earth. In both cases, what ultimately matters is the value of our personal and interpersonal lives.

The fundamental aim of intellectual inquiry, we may say, is to enhance our personal and interpersonal wisdom-our capacity to discover and achieve what is of value in life both for ourselves and for others. All intellectual problems are problems subordinate to our basic life-problems of wisdom. Of the four fundamental problems formulated above, it is the third and fourth that are the most fundamental, the first and second being pursued as a part of our concern to discover and achieve what is of value in life.

If intellectual inquiry is to meet with success in helping us to discover and achieve what is of value in life, then it must of course be generally understood to have this basic purpose. Education must enable us to come to understand and use intellectual inquiry in this kind of way,so that we discover fruitful interconnections between our personal problems and "impersonal", "objective" intellectual problems, our own personal, childish wonderings about the nature of the universe, for example, illuminating and being illuminated by the "official" wonderings of Kepler, Newton, Faraday or Einstein, or our personal problems of adolescence illuminating and being illuminated by the philosophical, social problems of the open society discussed, for example, by Popper, Fromm, Mead and Singer. Intellectual inquiry must itself be organized in such a way as to be amenable to this kind of understanding and use. Above all, scientists and scholars must be fundamentally concerned to develop intellectual inquiry in such a way that it is designed to help us build our "houses" of wisdom with our lives. All this is essential if intellectual inquiry is to be developed as the tribal discussion of humanity, designed to help us create more valuable lives, a better human world.

When viewed from this perspective of the philosophy of wisdom, 50 what present-day scientific, academic inquiry produces is, in terms of our analogy, more like an unusable, chaotic heap of bricks, slates, window frames and pipes, than something out of which we can build a habitable house. What confronts us is an immense pile of specialized jargon-ridden disciplines pursuing specialized intellectual problems dissociated from our problems of living, there being little indication as to how the nonspecialist is to find his way through all this to discover and achieve what is of most value in life. Scientific, academic inquiry is not pursued, understood, taught or organized in accordance with the overall assumption that what ultimately matters is personal and social wisdom.