

Physicalism at level 4 is accepted because it is by far the most empirically fruitful thesis at that level that is compatible with the thesis of comprehensibility, at level 5.

Since the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century, all new fundamental physical theories have enhanced the overall unity of theoretical physics. Thus Newtonian theory (NT) unifies Galileo's laws of terrestrial motion and Kepler's laws of planetary motion (and much else besides). Maxwellian classical electrodynamics (CEM) unifies electricity, magnetism and light (plus radio, infrared, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays). Special relativity (SR) brings greater unity to CEM (in revealing that the way one divides up the electromagnetic field into the electric and magnetic fields depends on one's reference frame). SR is also a step towards unifying NT and CEM in that it transforms space and time so as to make CEM satisfy a basic principle fundamental to NT, namely the (restricted) principle of relativity. SR also brings about a unification of matter and energy, via the most famous equation of modern physics, E = mc 2 , and partially unifies space and time into Minkowskian space-time. General relativity (GR) unifies space-time and gravitation, in that, according to GR, gravitation is no more than an effect of the curvature of space-time. Quantum theory (QM) and atomic theory unify a mass of phenomena having to do with the structure and properties of matter, and the way matter interacts with light. Quantum electrodynamics unifies QM, CEM and SR. Quantum electroweak theory unifies (partially) electromagnetism and the weak force. Quantum chromodynamics brings unity to hadron physics (via quarks) and brings unity to the eight kinds of gluon of the strong force. The standard model unifies to a considerable extent all known phenomena associated with fundamental particles and the forces between them (apart from gravitation). The theory unifies to some extent its two component quantum field theories, in that both are locally gauge invariant-the symmetry group being U(1) × SU(2) × SU(3). String theory, or M-theory, holds out the hope of unifying all phenomena. All these theories have been accepted because they progressively (a) increase the overall unity of theoretical physics and (b) increase the predictive power of physical theory, (a) being as important as (b). Physicalism is the key, persisting thesis of the entire research programme of theoretical physics since Galileo, and no obvious rival thesis, at that level of generality, can be substituted for physicalism in this research programme.

It may be asked how this succession of theories can reinforce physicalism when the totality of physical theory has always, up until now, clashed with physicalism. The answer: if physicalism is true, then all physical theories that only unify a restricted range of phenomena, must be false. Granted the truth of physicalism, and granted that theoretical physics advances by putting forward theories of limited but ever increasing empirical scope, then it follows that physics will advance from one false theory to another (as it has done: see point 7 of section 2.6 below), all theories being false until a unified theory of everything is achieved (which just might be true). The successful pursuit of physicalism requires progressive increase in both empirical scope and unity of the totality of fundamental physical theory. It is just this which the history of physics, from Galileo to today, exemplifies-thus demonstrating the unique fruitfulness of physicalism.

At level 3 that metaphysical thesis is accepted which is the best specific version of physicalism available, that seems to do the best justice to the evolution of physical theory. Two considerations govern acceptance of testable fundamental dynamical physical theories. Such a theory must be such that (i) it, together with all other accepted fundamental physical theories, exemplifies, or is a special case of, the best available metaphysical blueprint (at level 3), and physicalism (at level 4) to a sufficiently good extent, and (ii) it is sufficiently successful empirically (where empirical success is to be understood, roughly, in a Popperian sense).How does this hierarchical view of AOE overcome the problems and difficulties, indicated above, that confront any view which holds that science makes just one, possibly composite metaphysical assumption, at just one level? Given the one-thesis view, it must remain entirely uncertain as to what the one thesis should be. If it is relatively contentful and precise, more or less equivalent to the current level 3 thesis of AOE, then it is all too likely that this is false, and will need to be replaced in the future. If it is relatively contentless and imprecise, equivalent to theses at levels 7 or 6, this will not be sufficiently precise to exclude empirically successful but grossly ad hoc, aberrant theories. Even the level 4 thesis of physicalism is both too contentful and precise, and not contentful and precise enough. Physicalism may be false, and may need to be revised. At the same time, physicalism lacks the potential heuristic power to suggest good new fundamental theories which the more precise and contentful theses at level 3 possess. All these difficulties are avoided by the hierarchical view of AOE, just because of the hierarchy of assumptions, graded from the relatively contentless, imprecise and permanent at the top, to the relatively contentful, precise and impermanent (but methodologically and heuristically fruitful) at the bottom.