3.2 The discovery of special relativity

As far as the discovery of special relativity is concerned, Einstein used the above method in the following way. The two fundamental physical theories that he takes as his starting point (T 1 and T 2 ) are Newtonian mechanics (NM) and Maxwellian electrodynamics (ME). These two theories are incompatible, fundamentally because, given their most natural interpretation, NM is about forces-at-a-distance between point particles with mass, whereas ME is about one entity, the continuous electromagnetic field. More specifically, however, there is the following contradiction. NM asserts that forces affect accelerations, not velocities. Dynamic laws (laws concerning forces and their affects), formulated within the framework of NM, do not pick out any special velocity any more than they pick out some special place or time. ME does, however, pick out a special velocity: the velocity of light, the velocity at which, according to ME, vibrations in the field strengths of the electromagnetic field travel through space.

Both points are absolutely fundamental to the two theories. It is fundamental to the whole structure of NM that forces affect accelerations, not velocities (there thus being no role for absolute velocity within the theory). And it is fundamental to ME that influences should spread through the field at some fixed, finite velocity: for it is this which creates the need for a field theory in the first place. (Because gravitational influences, in Newton's theory of gravitation, spread at infinite velocity, instantaneous physical states can be specified in terms of point particles. When influences travel at some finite velocity, as in ME, this can no longer be done, as momentum and energy associated with variations in the force travelling at finite velocity through space will not be specified.)

One way in which the clash between NM and ME may be resolved is to interpret ME as a theory which presupposes the existence of the aether, states of the electromagnetic field being states of the aether. In this case, it is reasonable to hold that light has a constant velocity with respect to the aether, and the clash with NM disappears (the constancy of the velocity of light being as unproblematic as the constancy of the velocity of sound with respect to air). In his 1905 paper expounding special relativity, Einstein gave two reasons for rejecting this approach. First, it introduces an implausible asymmetry in the explanation of electromagnetic induction, implausible because of the symmetry in the phenomena to be explained. The theoretical explanation for the current in a conductor moving near a magnet at rest is strikingly different from the explanation of the current if the conductor is at rest and the magnet moves, even though all that matters is the relative motion as far as the effect is concerned. Second, it runs into empirical difficulties in that all attempts to detect the motion of the earth relative to the "light medium"-the aether-have failed. Einstein concluded that "the phenomena of electrodynamics as well as of mechanics possess no properties corresponding to the idea of absolute rest"

Einstein was of course well aware that the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment does not decisively demolish the aether; he knew of Lorentz's efforts to employ the FitzGerald contraction hypothesis to develop a version of electrodynamics which both presupposes the aether and is compatible with observation. In a paper published in 1907, however, Einstein remarked of the FitzGerald-Lorentz approach (surely with some justice) that it is "ad hoc" and "artificial")-although, as Grünbaum and Zahar remind us, this approach is not as grossly ad hoc as some have supposed

We know that during the decade before 1905, Einstein took the aether hypothesis sufficiently seriously to wonder how motion through the aether might be detectedNevertheless, it seems that, early on, Einstein was drawn to what may be called the "Faraday interpretation" of electromagnetism, according to which, instead of seeking to interpret electromagnetism in terms of some more fundamental kind of aetherial matter, one should, on the contrary, seek to understand matter in terms of electromagnetism, which is to be regarded as fundamental (the whole idea of the aether being a mistake). This is implicit in the "paradox" that Einstein discovered at the age of sixteen, and which he later saw as the germ from which special relativity grew. In his "Autobiographical Notes", Einstein describes the paradox thus:

If I pursue a beam of light with the velocity c  I should observe such a beam of light as a spatially oscillatory electromagnetic field at rest. However, there seems to be no such thing, whether on the basis of experience or according to Maxwell's equations. From the very beginning it appeared to me intuitively clear that, judged from the standpoint of such an observer, everything would have to happen according to the same laws as for an observer who, relative to the earth, was at rest. For how, otherwise, should the first observer know, i.e. be able to determine, that he is in a state of fast uniform motion?