

The motivation for insisting that it is of the essence of rationality to articulate our basic problems, and to propose and criticize possible solutions, is really very simple. If we do this, we give ourselves the best chance of seeking to solve those subordinate problems which are relevant to our main objectives. If we do not do this, the chances are that we will become engaged in seeking to solve sub-problems which are entirely misconceived or wholly irrelevant from the standpoint of achieving our basic objectives. Putting specialism into practice, in other words, is almost bound to lead to a mass of problem-solving activity which is misconceived or irrelevant from the standpoint of what matters most in lifea fair comment, I suggest, on a great deal of scientific, academic inquiry as pursued at present.What if no serious doubts really arose as to how we should answer the fundamental questions: What kind of world is this? How do we fit in? How have we come to be? What is of most value in life and how is it to be realized? How can we help develop a better human world? In that case universalism would be somewhat redundant. Serious doubts presumably would only arise in connection with much more specific, particular issues. But this is not our situation. The above questions are all profoundly problematic, even if many people appear not to recognize the fact. Our greatest uncertainties simply do arise in connection with our most general and important problems. This being the case, it is essential that we give due intellectual emphasis to the critical discussion of these problems, granted that we seek to develop a genuinely rational kind of intellectual inquiry. Specialism is thus to be rejected, on the grounds that it provides us with a conception of intellectual inquiry that is both irrational and humanly undesirable, these two features indeed being intimately connected. Instead of prompting us to attend to what is most important and problematic, specialism does precisely the opposite! The harmfulness of specialism does not lie in its tendency to encourage specialized puzzle solving. Universalism, too, insists on the vital importance of such puzzle solving. Nor need the harmfulness of specialism lie primarily in any tendency actively to suppress inquiry into fundamental problems. An upholder of specialism may simply see thought about fundamental problems as yet another specialized intellectual enterprise-grotesquely bankrupt intellectually, it is true, but scarcely deserving to be suppressed for all that. No, the real harmfulness of specialism arises from the fact that it appears to justify the pursuit of specialized problem solving divorced from the consideration of fundamental assumptions and problems. Worse, specialism holds that intellectual integrity and respectability actually demand that fundamental assumptions-vague, conjectural, controversial-be excluded from specialized inquiry. As a result, the adoption of specialism leads to the development of specialized inquiries, within a multitude of diverse disciplines, all of which become immune to elementary, outside, fundamental criticism.

This feature of specialism is responsible for such widespread intellectual corruption in present-day scientific, academic inquiry, that it deserves further comment. The key point that needs to be recognized is that it must always be irrational and undesirable to pursue specialized problems isolated from all consideration of fundamental problems. This is because the whole paraphernalia of specialized problem solving, as described above, actually requires us to give answers to fundamental problems. Choice of problems, formulation of problems, methods of attack, criteria for acceptable solutions, criteria for progress-all these essential features of specialized problem solving implicitly presuppose more or less broad answers to the four basic questions-answers all too likely to be more or less false or unacceptable and standing in need of improvement. If specialized puzzle solving cuts itself off from all critical consideration of fundamental issues (as specialism requires), then such puzzle solving becomes irrational in the straightforward and basic sense that implicit, influential and controversial assumptions are made which are permanently protected from critical assessment. Only by openly acknowledging the basic metaphysical and evaluative presuppositions implicit in specialized puzzle solving can such puzzle solving become genuinely rational.

It is above all the enormous success of science-conceived of in traditional empiricist terms-which has seemed to provide the most powerful case for specialism, and for the central assumption that specialized problem solving needs to be dissociated from fundamental assumptions and problems.

According to universalism, a basic task of science is to help us to improve our answers to the question "What kind of world is this?" Thus, according to universalism, a genuinely rational science, putting into practice the two most elementary rules of rational problem solving, gives intellectual priority to the task of proposing and criticizing answers to this question. Proposing and criticizing rival comprehensive metaphysical views about the nature of the universe, the nature of reality, constitutes, in other words, a central intellectual activity of a genuinely rational science.

Metaphysical assumptions at this level will influence drastically more restricted, specialized scientific problem solving-the kind of methods adopted, the kind of theories developed and tested. Thus if we believe ourselves to be in some kind of animistic universe-or in an Aristotelian universe-we will adopt different methods and develop different theories from those which we will adopt and develop if we hold, in Galileo's words, that "the book of Nature is written in the language of mathematics". The success of modern science, according to this standpoint, is due in large measure to the fortunate choice of a comprehensive metaphysical conception of Nature-shared by Kepler, Galileo and their successors-which sets the stage for a characteristic kind of specialized problem solving. According to this critical fundamentalist standpoint, then, science needs to be understood in terms of an interplay between fundamental and specialized problem solving, fundamental ideas and methods evolving with evolving specialized knowledge, this, in part, explaining the explosive growth of scientific knowledge. As our scientific knowledge improves, our knowledge about how to improve our knowledge-our methods-improves as well. All this illustrates the four rules of rational problem solving formulated above.