

At level 7 there is the thesis that the universe is such that we can continue to acquire knowledge of our local circumstances, sufficient to make life possible. At level 6 there is the more substantial thesis that there is some rationally discoverable thesis about the nature of the universe which, if accepted, makes it possible progressively to improve methods for the improvement of knowledge. "Rationally discoverable", here, means at least that the thesis is not an arbitrary choice from infinitely many analogous theses. At level 5 we have the even more substantial thesis that the universe is comprehensible in some way or other, whether physically or in some other way. This thesis asserts that the universe is such that there is something (God, a tribe of gods, a cosmic goal, a physical entity, a cosmic programme or whatever), which exists everywhere in an unchanging form and which, in some sense, determines or is responsible for everything that changes (all change and diversity in the world in principle being explicable and understandable in terms of the underlying unchanging something). A universe of this type deserves to be called "comprehensible" because it is such that everything that occurs, all change and diversity, can in principle be explained and understood as being the outcome of the operations of the one underlying something, present throughout all phenomena. At level 4 we have the still more substantial thesis that the universe is physically comprehensible in some way or other (a thesis I shall call physicalism 15 ). This asserts that the universe is made up of one unified self-interacting physical entity (or one kind of entity), all change and diversity being in principle explicable in terms of this entity. What this amounts to is that the universe is such that some yet-to-be-discovered unified physical theory of everything is true. At level 3 we have an even more substantial thesis, the best currently available specific idea as to how the universe is physically comprehensible. This asserts that everything is made of some specific kind of physical entity: corpuscle, point-particle, classical field, quantum field, convoluted space-time, string or whatever. Because the thesis at this level is so specific, it is almost bound to be false (even if the universe is physically comprehensible in some way or other). Here, ideas evolve with evolving knowledge. At level 2 we have our best fundamental physical theories, currently general relativity and the so-called standard model, and at level 1 we have empirical data (low-level experimental laws).

The thesis at the top of the hierarchy, at level 7, is such that, if it is false, knowledge cannot be acquired whatever is assumed. This thesis is, quite properly, accepted as a permanent part of scientific knowledge, even though we have no reason to suppose that it is true, since accepting it can only help, and cannot hinder, the acquisition of knowledge whatever the universe is like.

I have two arguments for the acceptance of the thesis of metaknowability, at level 6: (i) Granted that there is some kind of general feature of the universe which makes it possible to acquire knowledge of our local environment (as guaranteed by the thesis at level 7), it is reasonable to suppose that we do not know all that there is to be known about the nature of this general feature. It is reasonable to suppose, in other words, that we can improve our knowledge about the nature of this general feature, thus improving methods for the improvement of knowledge. Not to suppose this is to assume, arrogantly, that we already know all that there is to be known about how to acquire new knowledge. Granted that learning is possible (as guaranteed by the level 7 thesis), it is reasonable to suppose that, as we learn more about the world, we will learn more about how to learn. Granted the level 7 thesis, in other words, metaknowability is a reasonable conjecture. (ii) Meta-knowability is too good a possibility, from the standpoint of the growth of knowledge, not to be accepted initially, the idea only being reluctantly abandoned if all attempts at improving methods for the improvement of knowledge fail.

These two arguments for accepting meta-knowability are, admittedly, weak. It is crucial, however, that these two arguments make no appeal to the success of science, for a reason that will become apparent in a moment. The thesis that the universe is comprehensible, at level 5 is accepted because no rival thesis, at that level, has been so fruitful in leading to empirically progressive research programmes. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that all empirically successful research programmes into natural phenomena have been organized around the search for explanatory theories, of one kind or another. Aberrant rivals to the thesis of comprehensibility, which might be construed as supporting aberrant empirically successful research programmes, are rejected because of incompatibility with the thesis of meta-knowability at level 6. Such rival ideas are not "rationally discoverable" in that each constitutes an arbitrary choice from infinitely many equivalent rivals.