

What is irrational, in other words, is not Einstein's rejection of OQT, but the majority acceptance of OQT, the general blindness to its gross defects. Einstein, I believe, held this to be the result of the fact that too many physicists put fame before understanding the universe. Einstein felt that, given a choice between winning a Nobel Prize and improving our understanding of the universe, too many physicists would choose the former over the latter. This, for Einstein, amounted to a betrayal of the soul of theoretical physics, the pursuit of a corrupt goal, fame (not for Einstein so very different from the pursuit of power), in preference to the pursuit of the noble goal of improving understanding. And this in turn was, for Einstein, I believe, characteristic of a general sickness of our age: the pursuit of shallow or corrupt goals in life in preference to goals of genuine value.Here is the source of Einstein's inability to contribute to OQT after 1926. It is in this sense that Einstein's pursuit of his unified field theory is a kind of moral protest; this was the clearest way in which he could express his conviction as to what physics ought to be, at its best.

Einstein did not get everything right about OQT. He assumed that the ostensibly highly non-local features of OQT, which seem to contradict special relativity, do not correspond to reality. Here he was wrong.

If two particles, 1 and 2, interact at time t 1 and then separate widely then, in certain circumstances, a measurement performed on 1 at time t 2 enables one to predict with certainty what the result would be of measuring 2. A measurement of the momentum of 1 enables one to predict the precise momentum of 2; or, alternatively, a measurement of the position of 1 enables one to predict the position of 2. It is possible that 2 only acquires a precise momentum or position at time t 2 , when one or other kind of measurement is performed on 1. This possibility requires that an influence of some kind travels instantaneously from 1 to 2 to inform 2 as to whether it should acquire a precise momentum or position. If we reject the existence of such instantaneous influences, then in order to explain the correlations between measurements on 1 and 2 we are obliged to hold, it seems, that these correlations are the outcome of correlations established at time t 1 , when 1 and 2 interact. But this has the consequence that at time t 2 particle 2 must simultaneously have a precise position and momentum (since 2, by hypothesis, cannot "know" instantaneously, at time t 2 , whether particle 1, far away, is subjected to a position or momentum measurement). But, according to OQT, no system can be in a state which corresponds to having simultaneously a precise position and momentum. Thus OQT implies that correlations cannot be established at t 1 when 1 and 2 interact; they must be established instantaneously, at t 2 , when one or other measurement is performed on 1.

That OQT does have this highly non-local character was discovered by Einstein, and was expounded in a famous paper by Einstein,. Because of the evident clash with special relativity, Einstein concluded that this kind of non-local prediction of OQT is false. Particle 2 does have a precise position and momentum at time t 2 irrespective of whether measurements are performed on 1 or not, and QT must be interpreted as a purely statistical theory which gives only an incomplete description of the evolution of the individual system.

Einstein held that the only reasonable option available was to interpret QT in this way, as an inherently incomplete, statistical theory of "particles". There can be no doubt that this reinforced his conviction that QT did not constitute a proper starting point for future developments, which in turn reinforced Einstein's search for a unified field theory. Subsequent developments, due to Bohmand others, have shown that Einstein was wrong to dismiss the non-local predictions of OQT as not corresponding to reality: these predictions have now been experimentally confirmed! This concludes my case for saying Einstein invented and applied aim-oriented empiricism in scientific practice in developing the special and general theories of relativity, and in critically examining quantum theory.

But, it may be asked, did Einstein explicitly advocate aim-oriented empiricism? I turn now to a discussion of this question.

3.6 Did Einstein advocate aim-oriented empiricism?

There can be, to begin with, no doubt that Einstein devoted his life to the goal of discovering the unified structure of the universe and that, for him, this constituted an entirely proper aim for science, indeed, the noblest motive for pursuing scientific inquiry. Something of what the desire to understand meant to Einstein emerges from the following passage:

The most beautiful experience we can have is the mysterious. It is the fundamental emotion which stands at the cradle of true art and true science. Whoever does not know it and can no longer wonder, no longer marvel, is as good as dead, and his eyes are dimmed. It was the experience of mystery, even if mixed with fear, that engendered religion. A knowledge of the existence of something we cannot penetrate, our perceptions of the profoundest reason and the most radiant beauty, which only in their most primitive forms are accessible to our minds-it is this knowledge and this emotion that constitute true religiosity; in this sense, and in this alone, I am a deeply religious man. I cannot conceive of a God who rewards and punishes his creatures, or has a will of the kind that we experience in ourselves. Neither can I nor would I want to conceive of an individual that survives his physical death; let feeble souls, from fear or absurd egoism, cherish such thoughts. I am satisfied with the mystery of the eternity of life and with the awareness and a glimpse of the marvelous structure of the existing world, together with the devoted striving to comprehend a portion, be it ever so tiny, of the Reason that manifests itself in nature.