The view depicted in1 has, perhaps, a more direct relevance to theoretical physics; AOE as depicted in1 would become relevant if it emerged that the universe differs radically from the way modern science assumes it to be. AOE is more relevant to the philosophy of physics; it is required to solve the problem of induction, as we shall see in Chapter 7 (see also) It is also required to rebut objections of circularity, as we shall now see.

5.9 The circularity problem solved

One feature of the views depicted in Figures 2.1 and 5.1 may be deemed puzzling. They hold that when metaphysical thesis and physical theory clash, physical theory may be revised, but also that metaphysical thesis may be revised. How is such a two-way influence possible? In what follows I consider AOE as depicted in the previous section.

The first point to note is that just such a two-way influence occurs when theory and experiment clash. In general, if a theory clashes with an experiment that has been subjected to expert critical scrutiny and repeated, the theory is rejected. But on occasions, it turns out that it is the experimental result that is wrong, not the theory.In a somewhat similar way, if a new theory increases the conflict between the totality of physical theory and the currently accepted metaphysical thesis, at level 3 of the previous section, the new theory will be rejected (or not even considered or formulated).On occasions, however, a new theory may be developed which increases the conflict between the totality of theory and the current thesis at level 3 but decreases the conflict between the totality of theory and physicalism at level 4. In this case the new theory may legitimately be accepted and the thesis at level 3 may be revised. In principle, as I have already indicated, theses even higher up in the hierarchy may legitimately be revised in this way. A virtue of these hierarchical views is that they make possible and facilitate such two-way revisions.

However, another, potentially more serious, problem faces the two hierarchical views indicated above. Both incorporate what seems to be vicious circularity. Acceptance of theories is influenced by their degree of accord with metaphysical principles, the acceptance of which is in turn, in part, influenced by an appeal the empirical success of physical theories. The claim is that as theoretical knowledge and understanding improves, metaphysical theses and associated methods improve as well. There is something like positive feedback between improving knowledge, and improving knowledge-about-how-to-improve-knowledge. This, it is claimed, is the methodological key to the great success of modern science, namely that it adapts its metaphysical assumptions and methods (its aims and methods) to what it finds out about the nature of the universe.But how can such a circular procedure conceivably be valid? This is not an objection to the arguments and views put forward so far. No attempt has been made to justify claims to theoretical knowledge. The argument has been modest: granted acceptance of current physical theories and adoption of current methods, then physics is more rigorous (in that it accords better with PIR) if implicit metaphysical assumptions are made explicit, and those assumptions chosen which seem best to promote what we take to be scientific progress. The circularity objection would arise, however, if we were to go beyond the modest aspirations of sections 5.2 to 5.8, and attempt to solve the problem of induction,and justify acceptance of empirically successful unifying theories, within the context of AOE. But this does, in effect, amount to an objection to AOE. For it may be argued that AOE cannot be acceptable because the problem of induction cannot conceivably be solved within its framework: the moment the attempt is made to justify acceptance of scientific theories and metaphysical theses as claims to knowledge, vicious circularity sets in. How is this circularity objection to be met?

Here, in a nutshell, is the answer. Permitting metaphysical assumptions to influence what theories are accepted, and at the same time permitting theories to influence what metaphysical assumptions are accepted, may (if carried out properly), in certain sorts of universe, lead to genuine progress in knowledge. The level 6 thesis of meta-knowability, of AOE, asserts that this is just such a universe. And furthermore, crucially, reasons for accepting meta-knowability make no appeal to the success of science. In this way, meta-knowability legitimises the potentially invalid circularity of AOE depicted in

Relative to an existing body of knowledge and methods for the acquisition of new knowledge, possible universes can be divided up, roughly, into three categories: (i) those which are such that the metamethodology of AOE can meet with no success, not even apparent success, in the sense that new metaphysical ideas and associated methods for the improvement of knowledge cannot be put into practice so that success (or at least apparent success) is achieved; (ii) those which are such that AOE can meet with genuine success; and (iii) those which are such that AOE appears to be successful for a time, but this success is illusory, this being impossible to discover during the period of illusory success. Meta-knowability asserts that this universe is a type (i) or (ii) universe; it rules out universes of type (iii).