

(1) There is the option considered above. The inelastic interaction must be such that distinct "particle" channels have, associated with them, distinct asymptotic states which evolve in accordance with distinct Hamiltonians. This means at least that distinct "particles" have different masses associated with them (so that an excited state of a bound system is, potentially, a different "particle" from the ground state, since the excited state will be slightly more massive than the ground state). (2) As above, except that, for two interaction channels to differ it is not sufficient that "particles" associated with the two channels have distinct masses; either there are different numbers of "particles" (counting a bound system as one "particle") associated with different channels, or there is at least one "particle" which has a different charge, or force, associated with it. (3) For a probabilistic transition to occur, rest mass must be converted into energy of "particles" without rest mass (e.g. photons), or vice versa. (4) For a probabilistic transition to occur, fermions must be converted into bosons, or vice versa.

Only experiment can decide between these options. The import of this chapter, and of previous papers published by the author, 7 is that a major research effort ought to get underway, both theoretical and experimental, devoted to exploring and testing rival collapse hypotheses. Only in this way will a version of quantum theory be developed that is free of the defects of OQT and which also meets with greater empirical success than OQT. Only in this way will physics succeed in providing some kind of answer to the two childishly elementary, interrelated questions with which we began this chapter.

8.4 Quantum confusions a part of a historical pattern

I conclude with a historical remark. I have argued that the long-standing failure to solve the mysteries of the quantum domain-and so to develop a fully acceptable version of quantum theory-is due to the misguided attempt to understand the probabilistic quantum domain in terms of deterministic metaphysical ideas appropriate to the earlier theories of classical physics. As a result of the failure to solve the wholly misguided traditional wave/ particle problem, Heisenberg, Bohr, Born and others developed quantum theory as a theory about the results of performing measurements, which seemed successfully to avoid the need to specify precisely the nature of quantum systems, but which unintentionally led to the creation of a theory with severe, if somewhat surreptitious, defects. This pattern of confusion has occurred on at least two earlier occasions in the history of physics. On these occasions, too, physicists have attempted to interpret a new theory in terms of old, inappropriate metaphysics; the failure of this misguided effort then leads to despair at the possibility of interpreting the new theory realistically. It leads to instrumentalism, in other words, to the view that physical theories have to be interpreted as being about observable phenomena, and not about unobservable physical entities such as particles and fields. Eventually, however, the new theory may be interpreted in terms of new appropriate metaphysics. Physicists, one might say, are brilliant when it comes to equations, but not so brilliant-or at least very conservative-when it comes to metaphysics.

An example is Newton's theory of gravitation, which postulates a force at a distance between bodies with mass. The reigning metaphysical idea in Newton's time was the corpuscular hypothesis, the thesis that nature is made up of tiny corpuscles which interact only by contact. This thesis functioned as a standard of intelligibility: no fundamental physical theory could claim to be intelligible if it could not be interpreted in terms of the corpuscular hypothesis. The impossibility of interpreting Newton's theory of gravitation in terms of the corpuscular hypothesis initially led some of Newton's most eminent contemporaries to reject Newton's theory. Thus Huygens, in a letter to Leibniz, writes:

Concerning the Cause of the flux given by M. Newton, I am by no means satisfied [by it], nor by all the other Theories that he builds upon his Principle of Attraction, which seems to me absurd … I have often wondered how he could have given himself all the trouble of making such a number of investigations and difficult calculations that have no other foundation than this very principle.Newton in a sense agreed, as is indicated by his remark:

That gravity should be innate, inherent and essential to matter, so that one body may act upon another, at a distance through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else … is to me so great an absurdity, that I believe no man who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking can ever fall into it.The impossibility of interpreting the law of gravitation in terms of the corpuscular hypothesis, in terms of action-by-contact, led Newton to interpret the law instrumentalistically, as specifying the way bodies move without providing any kind of explanation for the motion, in terms of unobservable forces. Subsequently, however, Boscovich and others were able to conceive of a metaphysical view more appropriate to Newton's new theory, according to which nature is made up of point particles, with mass, each point particle being surrounded by a rigid, spherically symmetric, centrally directed field of force which varies with distance. Reject the corpuscular hypothesis and adopt, instead, this new Boscovichean metaphysics, and Newton's theory ceases to be incomprehensible, and becomes the very model of comprehensibility.