1, become increasingly demanding, but also increasingly speculative and uncertain. The totality of physical theory, at any given stage in the development of physics (except when a candidate unified theory of everything has been proposed and accepted) will only satisfy these methodological rules partially; a new theory, in order to be an advance from the standpoint of unity, must lead to a new totality of theory satisfying the methodological rules better than the previous totality.

This hierarchical view has the following advantages over any version of presuppositionism that restricts itself to a single (possibly composite) thesis. First, the hierarchical view does justice to both apparently conflicting desiderata, indicated above, which cannot be done if a single metaphysical assumption is made. The hierarchical view includes both the uniquely scientifically fruitful thesis of physicalismand the much less specific and problematic theses of physicalismSecond, the hierarchical view, as a result of making explicit metaphysical theses implicitly presupposed in adopting methods associated with levels (4) to (8), facilitates criticism and revision of these methods, which may well need to be done at some stage (if the corresponding metaphysical theses are false). Such criticism and revision is not facilitated if a single thesis is presupposed. Third, the hierarchical view assists revision of the more contentful and specific versions of physicalism low down in the hierarchy by providing a framework of relatively unproblematic assumptions and methods, at levels (9) to (6), which place restrictions on the way the more specific, problematic versions of physicalism may be revised, should the need to do so arise. If a succession of increasingly empirically successful theories are developed, T 1 , T 2 , , all of which clash with physicalism(8), but which accord increasingly well with physicalism(7), this might be taken as grounds for rejecting or modifying physicalism(8).

The reasons given above for including the relatively specific, scientifically fruitful metaphysical thesis of physicalism(8) in the hierarchy of accepted theses are reasons also for accepting an even more specific, scientifically fruitful metaphysical thesis, should one be available. A glance at the history of physics reveals that a succession of much more specific metaphysical theses have been accepted, or taken very seriously, for a time, each thesis being an attempt to capture aspects of physicalism. Ideas at this level include the following: the universe is made up of rigid corpuscles that interact by contact; it is made up of point atoms that interact at a distance by means of rigid, spherically symmetrical forces; it is made up of a unified field; it is made up of a unified quantum field; it is made up of quantum strings. These ideas tend to reflect the character of either the current best accepted physical theory, or assumptions made by current efforts to develop a new theory. This is not sufficient to be scientifically fruitful in the way that physicalism(8) is. For this, we require that the thesis in question is such that all accepted fundamental physical theories since Newton can be regarded as moving steadily towards capturing the thesis as a testable physical theory, in the manner indicated in section 5.3. One candidate for such a thesis is Lagrangianism. Lagrangianism asserts that the universe is such that all phenomena evolve in accordance with Hamilton's principle of least action, formulated in terms of some unified Lagrangian (or Lagrangian density), L. We require, here, that L is not the sum of two or more distinct Lagrangians, with distinct physical interpretations and symmetries, for example, one for the electroweak force, one for the strong force and one for gravitation, as at present; L must have a single physical interpretation, and its symmetries must have an appropriate group structure (the group not being a product of subgroups). We require, in addition, that current quantum field theories and general relativity emerge when appropriate limits are taken.All accepted fundamental physical theories, from Newton on, can be given a Lagrangian formulation. Furthermore, if we consider the totality of fundamental physical theory since Newton (empirical laws being included if no theory has been developed) then, as in the case of physicalism, every new accepted theory has brought the totality of physical theory nearer to capturing Lagrangianism. Thus Lagrangianism is at least as scientifically fruitful as physicalismIn fact it is more scientifically fruitful since it is very much more specific and contentful. The reasons for accepting physicalism(8) are reasons for accepting Lagrangianism too as the lowest thesis in the hierarchy of metaphysical theses, very much more potentially scientifically fruitful than physicalism(8), but also more speculative, more likely to need revision (see

It deserves to be noted that something like the hierarchy of metaphysical theses, constraining acceptance of physical theory from above, is to be found at the empirical level, constraining acceptance of theory from below. There are, at the lowest level, the results of experiments performed at specific times and places. Then, above these, there are low-level experimental laws, asserting that each experimental result is a repeatable effect. Next up, there are empirical laws such as Hooke's law, Ohm's law or the gas laws. Above these there are such physical laws as those of electrostatics or of thermodynamics. And above these there are theories which have been refuted, but which can be "derived", when appropriate limits are taken, from accepted fundamental theory-as Newtonian theory can be "derived" from general relativity. This empirical hierarchy, somewhat informal perhaps, exists in part for precisely the same epistemological and methodological reasons I have given for the hierarchical ordering of metaphysical theses: so that relatively contentless and secure theses (at the bottom of the hierarchy) may be distinguished from more contentful and insecure theses (further up the hierarchy) to facilitate pinpointing what needs to be revised, and how, should the need for revision arise. That such a hierarchy exists at the empirical level provides further support for my claim that we need to adopt such a hierarchy at the metaphysical level.