1.12 Final years and reputation

After The Postscript, a number of collections of essays have appeared, restating and elaborating themes already indicated: A World of, In Search of a Better, The Myth of the, Knowledge and the, The World of, All Life is Problem Solving (1999), and After the Open Society

Popper was knighted in 1965, and became a Companion of Honour in 1982. He retired from his position at the LSE in 1969. He became a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1976. Popper's wife, Hennie, died in 1985, after a long struggle with cancer. In his later years, Popper was showered with academic honours of various kinds: membership of many academic societies, honorary degrees, conferences dedicated to his philosophy, and honours, medals and prizes from various sources (see). Popper died a week after a serious operation, on 17 September 1994.

Popper's reputation, after his death, has suffered a curious fate. Most philosophers and philosophers of science recognize the significance of Popper's work for twentieth-century philosophy of science, but seem to hold that it has little to contribute to the field in the second decade of the twenty-first century. Popper has become somewhat passé. Many scientists, on the other hand, hold Popper in high esteem, and even call upon his work during the course of debates about scientific matters-a point made recently by

As far as Popper's reputation among philosophers is concerned, a part of the problem is that too few philosophers have responded to a central feature and claim of Popper's work: that the basic task of philosophy is to tackle, and try to help solve, urgent, fundamental problems that have their roots outside the discipline, in science, politics, the arts, the environment, education-problems which, if solved, may well have widespread fruitful implications for such diverse fields. And as far as the philosophy of science is concerned, the discipline has developed in the twenty-first century in ways that would have horrified Popper. Philosophy of science has increasingly succumbed to what was, for him, the ultimate intellectual sin: specialization. It has fragmented into philosophy of physics, biology, chemistry, psychology, neuroscience and so on-mirroring specialization in science, and doing nothing to counteract it. The fundamental problems about the nature of the cosmos, our place in the cosmos, and our knowledge and understanding of it, that so gripped Popper's imagination, are increasingly ignored.

In the rest of this book, I set out to subject Popper's ideas to ferocious criticism in an attempt to improve them. It will emerge that Popper's ideas about science, reason, quantum theory, academic inquiry, how to make progress towards a more civilized world, all need radical revision. In order to do justice to what is best in Popper's philosophy, some of its tenets must be rejected-including what is, perhaps, its most famous tenet, the principle of demarcation. My hope is that Popper's whole approach to doing philosophy will come to be seen as highly relevant to the tasks that face us today: to provoke the thought of humanity into tackling, imaginatively, critically, and fruitfully, the gigantic problems that confront the modern world. Freed of some deadwood, Popper's work becomes highly relevant to today's global problems, both practical and intellectual.

Select bibliography of works by Popper: 147-59. "Natural Selection and the Emergence of

Popper, Kuhn, Lakatos and aim-oriented empiricism

2.1 Introduction

In this chapter I argue that aim-oriented empiricism (AOE), a conception of natural science that I have spelled out and defended at some length elsewhere, 1 is a kind of synthesis of the views of Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos, but is also an improvement over the views of all three. Whereas Popper's falsificationism protects metaphysical assumptions implicitly made by science from criticism, AOE exposes all such assumptions to sustained criticism, and furthermore focuses criticism on those assumptions most likely to need revision if science is to make progress. Even though AOE is, in this way, more Popperian than Popper, it is also, in some respects, more like the views of Kuhn and Lakatos than falsificationism is. AOE is able, however, to solve problems which Popper's, Kuhn's and Lakatos's views cannot solve.

AOE stems from the observation that theoretical physics persistently accepts unified theories, even though endlessly many empirically more successful, but seriously disunified, ad hoc rivals can always be concocted. This persistent preference for and acceptance of unified theories, even against empirical considerations, means that physics makes a persistent untestable (metaphysical) assumption about the universe: the universe is such that no seriously disunified, ad hoc theory is true. Intellectual rigour demands that this substantial, influential, highly problematic and implicit assumption be made explicit, as a part of theoretical scientific knowledge, so that it can be critically assessed, so that alternative versions can be considered, in the hope that this will lead to an improved version of the assumption being developed and accepted. Physics is more rigorous when this implicit assumption is made explicit even though there is no justification for holding the assumption to be true. Indeed, it is above all because there is no such justification, and the assumption is substantial, influential, highly problematic and all too likely to be false, that it becomes especially important to implement the above requirement for rigour, and make the implicit (and probably false) assumption explicit.