6. Evolving aims and methods. A point, briefly alluded to in 4 and 5 above, deserves further emphasis. As physics has evolved, from Newton's time to today, non-empirical methods, determining what theories will be accepted and rejected, have evolved as well. Newton, in his Principia, formulated four rules of reasoning, three of which are concerned with simplicityPrinciples that have been proposed since include: invariance with respect to position, orientation, time, uniform velocity, charge conjugation, parity and time-reversal; principles of conservation of mass, momentum, angular momentum, energy and charge; Lorentz invariance; Mach's principle; the principle of equivalence; principles of gauge invariance, global and local; supersymmetry; duality principles; the principle that different kinds of particle should be reduced to one kind, and different kinds of force should be reduced to one kind; and the principle that space-time on the one hand, and particles and forces on the other, should be unified. All of these principles can be interpreted as methodological rules which specify requirements theories must meet in order to be accepted. They can also be interpreted as physical principles, making substantial assertions about such things as space, time, matter and force. Some, such as conservation of mass, parity and charge conjugation, have been shown to be false; others, such as Mach's principle, have never been generally accepted; still others, such as supersymmetry, remain speculative.

Principles such as these, which can be interpreted either as physical assertions or as methodological principles, which are made explicit, developed, revised and, on occasions, rejected or refuted, are hard to account for within the framework of falsificationism. It is especially difficult, within this framework, to account for principles which (a) have a quasi a priori role in specifying requirements theories must satisfy in order to be accepted, but which at the same time (b) make substantial physical assertions about the nature of the universe. AOE, on the other hand, predicts the existence of such principles, with just the features that have been indicated. Accepted principles are components of the currently accepted level 3 blueprint. As the accepted blueprint evolves, these principles, interpreted either as physical or methodological principles, evolve as well. Indeed, according to AOE, these principles, and associated blueprints, do not just evolve, they are improved with improving theoretical knowledge. AOE provides a more or less fixed framework of relatively unproblematic assumptions and associated methods (at level 4 or above) within which highly problematic level 3 assumptions and associated methods may be improved in the light of the empirical success and failure of rival research programmes (which adopt rival level 3 assumptions and associated methods).

This can be reformulated in terms of aims and methods of physics. A basic aim of theoretical physics is to discover the true theory of everything. This aim can be characterized in a range of ways, depending on how broadly or narrowly "theory of everything" is construed, what degree of unity such a theory must have in order to be a theory at all, and thus how much metaphysics is built into, or is presupposed by, the aim so characterized. The aim might be construed in such a way that no more than the truth of the thesis at level 7, or at level 6, is presupposed. Or, more specifically, the truth of the thesis at level 5 might be presupposed, or even more specifically, the truth of physicalism at level 4; or a range of increasingly specific blueprints at level 3 might be presupposed. Corresponding to these increasingly specific aims there are increasingly restrictive methods. As the aim becomes more specific, so it becomes more problematic, in that the presupposed metaphysics becomes increasingly likely to be false, which would make the corresponding aim unrealizable. AOE can thus be construed as providing a kind of nested framework of aims and methods, the aims becoming, as one goes down the hierarchy, increasingly problematic, and vulnerable to being unrealisable in principle, because the presupposed metaphysics is false. Within the framework of relatively unspecific, unproblematic, permanent aims and methods (high up in the hierarchy) much more specific, problematic, fallible aims and methods (low down in the hierarchy) can be revised and improved in the light of improving knowledge. There is, as I have already in effect said, something like positive feedback between improving scientific knowledge and improving aims and methods. As knowledge improves, knowledge-about-how-to-improve-knowledge improves as well. This capacity of science to adapt itself-its aims and methods (its philosophy of science)-to what it finds out about the universe is, according to AOE, the methodological key to the astonishing progressive success of science. Falsificationism, with its fixed aim and fixed methods, is quite unable to do justice to this positive feedback, meta-methodological feature of science, this capacity of science to learn about learning as it proceeds.

7. Verisimilitude. The so-called problem of verisimilitude arises because physics usually proceeds from one false theory to another, thus rendering obscure what it can mean to say that science makes progress. Popper (1963, ch. 10 and addenda) tried to solve this problem within the framework of falsificationism but, as