On the other hand, there have been a number of recent developments (at the time of writing) in the UK-and no doubt elsewherewhich can perhaps be interpreted as constituting first steps towards putting universalism, or critical specio-fundamentalism, into academic practice. A number of new departments, institutes and centres have been created devoted to policy and peace studies. Growing concern about environmental problems, especially those associated with climate change, have led to the founding of new institutions which seek to bring specialists together to engage in relevant interdisciplinary research, and to communicate with government, the media and the public. Thus at the University of Cambridge there is the Cambridge Environmental Initiative (CEI), launched in December 2004, which brings together diverse specialized fields of research to work on environmental problems, and holds seminars and public lectures to put research scientists in touch with one another, and with the public. A similar coordinating, interdisciplinary initiative exists at the University of Oxford. It is called the School of Geography and the Environment, and it was founded in 2005 (under another name). At University College London (UCL), my own university, there is a recent and very active initiative called the Grand Challenges programme, which seeks to bring together a wide range of specialists to work on seven broad themes all having to do with human wellbeing. A policy document produced in 2011 is called "The Wisdom Agenda". 58 It seeks to "deliver a culture of wisdom" at UCL. There is also the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, founded by twenty-eight scientists from ten different universities or institutions in 2000. It is based in six British universities, has links with six others, and is funded by three research councils, NERC, EPSRC and ESRC (environment, engineering, and social and economic research). In recent years many scientists have become concerned to involve the public in debate about questions of science policy.There is now an active movement which seeks to promote public engagement with science.In 2015, Nature produced a special issue devoted to interdisciplinarity. One article argues that it is vital to "bridge the divide between the biophysical and the social sciences" in order to tackle global problems, but goes on to stress just how difficult this is to doThe authors suggest five principles which help such interdisciplinary work succeed. Another contribution discusses the problems that confront efforts to set up interdisciplinary researchProponents of interdisciplinarity complain that funding, career prospects and status all favour disciplinary rather than interdisciplinary work. Much depends, however, on how close or distant from one another the component disciplines of interdisciplinary work are-the more distant, the greater the obstacles to success. Especially difficult is the task of combining science and humanities. Another contribution attempts to assess the extent to which interdisciplinarity is increasing. It turns out that there is, at least, an increase in papers that mention "interdisciplinary" in the title). Throughout this special issue of Nature, it is assumed that we need a kind of science-a kind of academic inquiry-well designed from the standpoint of helping us solve problems in the real world. It is argued that interdisciplinarity will suffice to provide what is required. But it will not. We need to instigate sustained imaginative and critical thinking about our fundamental problems-intellectual and humanitarian-at the heart of the academic enterprise, this to be conducted in such a way that it interacts both with more specialized academic problem solving, and with thinking in the social world, guiding personal, social, institutional, national and global life.

There are, in short, a few scattered signs that the revolution, from specialism to universalism, or from knowledge to wisdom, is already under way. It will need, however, much wider cooperative support-from scientists, scholars, students, research councils, university administrators, vice chancellors, teachers, the media and the general public-if it is to become anything more than what it is at present, a few fragmentary, scattered changes intended to put right quite specific perceived defects in the status quo. What we need is a high-profile campaign, in the public eye, concerned to make out the case for a comprehensive revolution in our universities so they come to put universalism, or the philosophy of wisdom, into academic practice. If this revolution ever comes about it will be comparable in its long-term impact to that of the Renaissance, the scientific revolution or the Enlightenment. The outcome will be that we will at last have what we so urgently need, institutions of learning and research rationally organized and devoted to helping us realize what is of value in life-helping us make progress towards as good a world as possible.

It is important to appreciate the existence of a central backbone of argument running through these four books. In The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1959), Popper argues (as we all know) that all scientific knowledge is irredeemably conjectural in character, it being impossible to verify theories empirically. Science makes progress by proposing bold conjectures in response to problems, which are then subjected to sustained attempted empirical refutation. This falsificationist conception of scientific method is then generalized to form Popper's conception of (critical) rationality, a general methodology for solving problems or making progress. As Popper puts it in The Logic of Scientific Discovery, "intersubjective testing is merely a very important aspect of the more general idea of inter-subjective criticism, or in other words, of the idea of mutual rational control by critical discussion"