

But did Einstein really invent an authentic method of discovery in view of his failure, during the last thirty years of his life, to discover the unified field theory he so ardently sought?

One reply can be made immediately: the method of discovery, indicated above, though rational, is also non-mechanical and fallible. The failure of the method to lead to a good fundamental new theory over a period of thirty years-even in the hands of Einstein-does not prove that the method is inauthentic.

But there is a much more important reply to be made. Einstein did not use his method of discovery in seeking to formulate his unified field theory. Or rather Einstein misapplied this method, in a quite elementary way.

After around 1930, the two fundamental theories that stand in most glaring contradiction with each other are general relativity and quantum theory. In order to implement Einstein's rational method of discovery from about 1930, the first step to take is to extract basic principles, P 1 and P 2 , from general relativity and quantum theory respectively, which contradict each other-this even perhaps being the nub of the contradiction between the two theories. The task then is to modify P 1 and P 2 (or something else) to form P 3 , a new principle which guides us to a new unified theory, T 3 , unifying general relativity and quantum theory.Einstein did none of this. Instead he took as his two theories general relativity and classical electrodynamics and sought to unify these two theories, to form a theory which applied to all phenomena, including quantum phenomena. One may well have doubts as to whether these two theories really do fundamentally contradict each other-even though the theories are clearly two distinct theories and not one unified theory. They are at least both field theories; they both incorporate Lorentz invariance, at least locally; and they are both classical and deterministic. What is dramatically apparent is that the fundamental contradiction of theoretical physics after 1930 concerns, not the clash between classical general relativity and classical electrodynamics, but rather the clash between general relativity and quantum theory. (One can add that it is perverse to continue to take the unification of gravitation and electromagnetism as the unification to strive for, sufficient to create the comprehensive unified field theory, after the discovery of the strong and weak forces in addition to the forces of gravitation and electromagnetism.) Why did Einstein so crudely and wilfully misapply his rational method of discovery? The answer is straightforward: because of his abhorrence of quantum theory given its orthodox interpretation (OQT).Einstein was absolutely correct to find OQT fundamentally defective from the crucial standpoint of "inner perfection". As I shall argue in a moment, Einstein's attitude towards OQT exemplifies yet again his (sound) commitment in scientific practice to aim-oriented empiricism and scientific realism. Where Einstein went wrong was to conclude that quantum theory was therefore entirely devoid of heuristic value-that it "offers no useful point of departure for future development"

What is striking about this is that it is actually a vital feature of Einstein's method of discovery that one deals with theories that are intrinsically defective. The defects are clues as to how the theory may be fruitfully modified. As we have seen above, Einstein indicates a number of fundamental defects inherent in Newtonian mechanics and Maxwellian electrodynamics. Einstein even knew, by 1901, as a result of Planck's work, that both theories are fundamentally incorrect. This did not stop him taking these theories as "points of departure". Indeed, it is the defects in the theories, as perceived by Einstein, which make his method of discovery so successful: for it is these defects which indicate how the theories are to be modified to overcome the contradictions between them. For Einstein to argue, after 1930, that the defective character of quantum theory ensures that the theory cannot form a proper point of departure does violence to the very heart of Einstein's own earlier method of discovery, used in the discovery of special and general relativity with such striking success.

Why did Einstein fail to recognize the fairly obvious point just made? In essence, because his abhorrence of OQT was so intense, so profound, that it was emotionally impossible for him to work seriously with the theory. He did not want to contribute to what he interpreted as a sickness which had entered physics, and which he regarded as symptomatic of the basic sickness of our times. In a sense, Einstein turned his back on quantum theory, and devoted himself to the task of unifying general relativity and classical electromagnetism as a kind of moral protest against the tenor of our times.

In order to substantiate this point I must now break off my discussion of Einstein's successes and failures in implementing aim-oriented empiricism so that I can consider in a little more detail the question of Einstein's attitude to OQT.

3.5 Einstein and quantum theory

His mature attitude can be summarized like this. From the standpoint of empirical criteria, OQT must be judged to be an immense success. From the equally important standpoint of criteria having to do with "inner perfection", with unification, OQT must be judged to be a disaster. This is because the theory cannot be interpreted to be about some hypothetical reality. It was not so much the lack of determinism that came to worry Einstein as the lack of realism. In his "Autobiographical Notes" he puts it like this: