

4.3 Objections

It may be objected that we never encounter the naked content of a theory, formulation free; we only encounter theories given some formulation. How, then, can we judge whether the content does or does not vary through the space S? The answer is that theories are not natural objects we stumble across; we formulate theories, and it is for us to ensure, granted we want our theories to be unified, that the content does not change as we move through S. We can arrange, however, that formulation matches content by ensuring that the terminology, the concepts, we use to formulate a theory do not surreptitiously change as we move through S. Given invariant concepts, if the form of the theory is also invariant throughout S, its content will be too, but if, for example, we surreptitiously change our units of length as we move through space, then a theory whose content is spatially invariant will change its form with changes of spatial position (a point which will be taken up again below).

It may be objected that, given any theory, however unified, special regularities will always arise in restricted regions of S, which means disunity. Whether or not the theory is unified is, at best, ambiguous. Thus, given NT, in some regions of S there will be solar systems with planets that rotate in the same direction and conform to Bode's law, whereas in other regions of S these regularities or "laws" will be violated. The answer is to distinguish sharply between accidental and law-like regularities; only the latter are relevant for the assessment of unity. But how is this distinction to be made? The answer is to adopt a suggestion made elsewhere) that physical laws are true if and only if corresponding physical dynamical (or necessitating) properties exist. According to this suggestion, Newton's law of gravitation can be interpreted as attributing the dynamical property of Newtonian gravitational charge to massive objects. Objects that have this property of necessity obey Newton's law of gravitation. (The empirical content of NT, on this interpretation, is concentrated in the factual assertion: all massive objects possess Newtonian gravitational charge equal to their mass.) If no such property corresponds to a true regularity, then it is merely a true accidental regularity, and not a true law. For unity we require that dynamical properties remain the same throughout S; the regularities of (some) solar systems, mentioned above, are not relevant because these regularities are not law-like, and no dynamical property exists corresponding to them.It may be objected that physical systems that possess symmetries, which are also symmetries of the theory that determines their evolution, will evolve in accordance with a simplified version of the theory. Thus systems consisting of two spheres equal in every way rotating in a fixed circle about their centre of mass obey a simplified version of the dynamical laws of NT. This means there are regions of S where the dynamical laws are especially simple, and thus different from other regions. Does this mean the theory is correspondingly disunified? The answer is no. We need, again, to consider dynamical properties corresponding to dynamical laws. In the example just considered, if NT is true (interpreted essentialistically) then the spheres in question possess gravitational charge just like all other massive objects. It is just that, in the case of the systems possessing some rotational symmetry, the full, rich implications of the dynamical property of gravitational charge is not made manifest.

It may be objected that we may not know whether two formulations of a theory are just that, two formulations with the same physical content, or two distinct theories with distinct contents. Heisenberg's and Schrödinger's distinct formulations of quantum theory might be an example. This is correct but beside the point. The terminological problem arises when we reformulate a given theory, T, in a variety of ways, some simple and unified, some horribly complex and disunified, but we do this in such a way as to ensure quite specifically that the different formulations have precisely the same content, make precisely the same assertions about the world, this being something that we can always do. The solution to the problem proposed above is not in any way undermined by the fact that it sometimes happens that we do not know whether two formulations of a theory have the same or different contents. Nor is the distinction between form and content undermined: form has to do with what we write down on paper, content with what is being asserted. That we sometimes do not know whether difference of formulation ensures difference of content does not in the least undermine the distinction between form and content. It deserves to be noted, in addition, that one and the same formulation of a theory may be interpreted in more than one way, and thus may have different contents associated with it-a point which, again, does not undermine the theory presented here.

It may be objected that the distinction between dynamical laws which do, and do not, remain the same throughout the space S cannot be maintained. Consider the following two functions: (1) y = 3x for all x, and (2) y = 3x for x ≤ 2 and y = 4x for x > 2. It is tempting to say that (1) remains the same as x changes, but (2) does not, since what (2) asserts changes at x = 2. But given the mathematical notion of function as a rule, (2) is just as good a function as (1) and, like (1), "remains the same" as x varies. Functions corresponding to physical theories are somewhat more elaborate than this, but the above point is not affected by that consideration: it seems that the very distinction between "remains the same" and "changes" as one moves through S collapses. Clearly, in order to meet this objection, functions corresponding to physical theories need to be restricted to a narrower notion of function than the above standard mathematical one, if we are to be able to distinguish between functional relationships which do, and which do not, "remain the same" as values of variables change. We need to appeal to what may be called "invariant functions", functions which specify some fixed set of mathematical operations to be performed on "x" (or its equivalent) to obtain "y" (or its equivalent). In the example just given, (1) is invariant, but