

6.4 Assessment

Which is to be preferred, AOE or MAI? The two views need not, of course, be regarded as rivals. AOE is a highest-level model, whereas MAI is a medium-level model; one could consider accommodating MAI within AOE. This would require, however, that MAI be modified quite extensively, as the previous section has shown.

Interpreting AOE and MAI as rival rationalist accounts of science, my chief criticism of MAI is that it is a version of SE, and thus suffers from the defects that all versions of SE suffer from. Given any empirically successful theory, T, there will always be endlessly many ad hoc rivals to T, even more empirically successful than T, which will never even be considered within science, let alone considered and rejected. In persistently rejecting such ad hoc rivals, even more empirically successful than T, science makes a persistent assumption about the nature of the universe. This contradicts SE-and contradicts MAI.McAllister might seek to evade this conclusion by arguing, as he does in his book, that non-empirical, aesthetic criteria that rule out acceptance of empirically successful, ad hoc rival theories, are too diverse in character, too changeable over time, to amount to the implicit acceptance of any persistent assumption. But such an argument collapses the moment one takes into account radically ad hoc theories of the kind considered in this book, in Chapters 2 and 5, and in. Rejection (or rather complete neglect) of such radically ad hoc theories persists throughout revolutions and all changes in aesthetic fashions in science. The persistent rejection of such theories unquestionably commits science to making a substantial metaphysical assumption about the nature of the universe.

McAllister might, at this point, appeal to the pragmatic justification of induction of Braithwaite and Mellor, already referred to above. According to this argument, science proceeds, and is justified in proceeding, as if it assumes there are regularities to be discovered, but does not actually assume that regularities exist. But even if this argument is valid, it does not in any way invalidate my point above, that in persistently rejecting empirically successful ad hoc theories, science implicitly makes a persistent metaphysical assumption about the world. It should be noted that kinds of ad hoc theories can be formulated that specify regularities, in that these theories are invariant with respect to position and time (no specific places or times being specified by the theories). These theories might be said to specify ad hoc regularities. But, in any case, the Braithwaite-Mellor attempt at solving the problem of induction does not succeed. Restricting science to the search for regularities is both too narrow, and not narrow enough. Too narrow, because it is conceivable that we can live and acquire knowledge but not by searching for regularities in phenomena. God might get in touch with us, explain His purposes, keep us informed about what is going to happen. Getting in touch with God by means of prayer and meditation, and not by searching for regularities, might be the way to acquire knowledge; and various other science fiction possibilities can be imagined (see. Such possibilities are excluded by the search for knowledge as characterized by Braithwaite and Mellor; this means these possibilities are just dogmatically assumed to be false. But the Braithwaite-Mellor approach is also not narrow enough, because, as I have indicated above, if science is to be possible, ad hoc regularities must be persistently excluded from consideration. And, as we have seen, there is no sharp distinction between the ad hoc and the non-ad hoc. In Chapter 4 I listed eight kinds of disunity-in effect, eight different ways in which regularities might be ad hoc, which range from the severely ad hoc (distinct regularities in different space-time regions) to the scarcely ad hoc at all (space-time and matter not being unified). What does the policy of "inductive projection") amount to? Does it involve merely excluding permanently all theories that are type (1) ad hoc (distinct regularities in different space-time regions)? Again, this is both too narrow, and not narrow enough. Exactly the same objection arises wherever the line is drawn, between regularities that are too ad hoc to be considered by science, and those that are sufficiently non-ad hoc to be open to scientific consideration. We cannot, at this point, simply invoke the aesthetic induction, and declare that we discover, by induction, where the line is to be drawn between the acceptably and unacceptably ad hoc, because, as McAllister himself has so clearly shown, for logical reasons, the aesthetic induction can only proceed once methods have been arrived at by aim-analysis

Another approach might be to favour permanently in science theories that are as non-ad hoc as possible, in all eight senses, but not to draw a rigid line between the acceptably and unacceptably ad hoc. This would allow something like the aesthetic induction to proceed in science (although not in quite the open-ended way in which McAllister envisages). But even this attempt at solving the problem is both too narrow and not narrow enough. Endlessly many universes are possible in which we may live and acquire knowledge, and yet this inductive policy would not be appropriate for acquiring knowledge. It biases the search for knowledge in the direction of physicalism. But physicalism may be false; the universe may be comprehensible in some other way, or not comprehensible at all.