

Another example is provided by James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electrodynamics. Maxwell himself, and most of his contemporaries and immediate successors, sought to interpret the electromagnetic field in terms of a material substratum, the hypothetical aether, itself to be understood in Newtonian terms. A tremendous amount of effort was put into trying to understand Maxwell's field equations in terms of the aether. Faraday, who appreciated that one should take the electromagnetic field as a new kind of physical entity, and explain matter in terms of the field rather than try to explain the field in terms of a kind of hypothetical matter (the aether), was ignored. The unrealistic character, and ultimate failure, of mechanical models of the electromagnetic field led many to hold that the real nature of the field must remain a mystery. The most that one could hope for from Maxwell's equations, it seemed, was the successful prediction of observable phenomena associated with electromagnetism. This instrumentalistic attitude remained even after the advent of Einstein's special theory of relativity in 1905, which might be interpreted as giving credence to the idea that it is the field that is fundamental. Gradually, however, Einstein and others came to adopt the view that one should see the field as a new kind of physical entity, quite distinct from corpuscle and point particle.

There are two lessons to be learned from these episodes, one for quantum theory specifically, the other for theoretical physics in general. In the first place, quantum theory, if fundamentally probabilistic, needs to be formulated as a theory about fundamentally probabilistic physical entities-propensitons-however weird these may seem given our common sense and classical intuitions. We require a fully microrealistic version of quantum theory which, though testable, says nothing about "observables" or "measurement" in the basic postulates of the theory at all. Second, if theoretical physics is to free itself from the obstructive tendency to interpret new theories in terms of old, inappropriate metaphysics, physicists need to recognize that metaphysical ideas are inevitably an integral part of theoretical physics, and need to be developed and improved in the light of new theoretical developments. In previous chapters I have argued that, in order to construe science as a rational enterprise, we need to see physics as making a hierarchy of metaphysical assumptions concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe, these assumptions becoming increasingly insubstantial, and thus increasingly likely to be true, as we ascend the hierarchy. 8 According to this "aim-oriented empiricist" view, this hierarchy creates a framework of reasonably secure, permanent assumptions (and associated methods) high up in the hierarchy, within which much more specific, substantial and fallible assumptions (and associated methods), low down in the hierarchy, can be revised and improved. If ever the physics community came to accept and put into scientific practice this aim-oriented empiricist methodology, then the best available metaphysical ideas might lead the way to the discovery of new physical theories, instead of obstructing interpretation and understanding of theories that have been discovered (and thus also obstructing the discovery of new theories). In one exceptional case in the history of physics, the new metaphysics came first, led the way, and actually made possible the subsequent discovery of the new theory. This happened when Einstein discovered general relativity. Einstein first hit upon the metaphysical idea that gravitation is due to the curvature of space-time, and then subsequently discovered how to capture this idea precisely in the field equations of general relativity. In stark contrast to the cases of Newtonian theory, Maxwellian classical electrodynamics and quantum theory, general relativity was discovered as a result of the prior development of new appropriate metaphysics, instead of the discovery of the new theory, if anything, being obstructed by current metaphysical ideas, the theory being misunderstood and misinterpreted by such ideas, once discovered. That Einstein's discovery of general relativity should stand out in this way is not, in my view, surprising: in Chapter 3 I argued that Einstein both put into practice, and upheld, a conception of science close to that of aim-oriented empiricism.

Science, reason, knowledge and wisdom: a critique of specialism

9.1 Introduction

In this chapter I argue for a kind of intellectual inquiry which has, as its basic aim, to help all of us to resolve rationally the most important problems that we encounter in our lives, problems that arise as we seek to discover and achieve that which is of value in life. Rational problem solving involves articulating our problems, proposing and criticizing possible solutions. It also involves breaking problems up into subordinate problems, creating a tradition of specialized problem solving-specialized scientific, academic inquiry, in other words. It is vital, however, that specialized academic problem solving be subordinated to discussion of our more fundamental problems of living. At present specialized academic inquiry is dissociated from problems of living-the sin of specialism, which I criticize.

I proceed by discussing two rival views about the nature of intellectual inquiry that I call universalism and specialism. 1 My claim is that at present the whole institutional structure of academic inquiry, by and large, presupposes specialism. Of the two views under consideration it is, however, universalism, and not specialism, which provides us with a rational conception of intellectual inquiry. Failure to put universalism into practice has profoundly damaging consequences for science and scholarship, and indeed for life, for our whole modern world. Ideally intellectual inquiry ought to help us to tackle rationally those problems of living which we encounter in seeking to discover and achieve that which is of value in life. Intellectual inquiry ought, in other words, to devote reason to the enhancement of wisdom (wisdom being defined here as the capacity to discover and achieve that which is of value in life, for oneself and others-wisdom thus including knowledge and understanding, but much else besides). In fact, at present, scientific, academic inquiry gives priority to the achievement of knowledge only, rather than to the achievement of wisdom. It is essentially the general adoption of specialism which is responsible for the persistence of this highly undesirable state of affairs.