, something that MAI does not provide.

A fundamental difference between MAI and AOE, encapsulated in the title of this chapter, is that, whereas MAI holds that aesthetic criteria are important in science, AOE denies this, all non-empirical criteria for theory choice being reducible to the demand that the totality of fundamental physical theory exemplify the level 4 thesis of physicalism or, more specifically, the best available blueprint at level 3. For AOE, what matters is unity or comprehensibility, not beauty.

But this difference is terminological rather than substantial. McAllister defends a projectivist, subjectivist account of the beauty of theories. Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, rather than in the theory itself.Scientists judge certain theories to be beautiful because of non-aesthetic properties that they possess objectively; it is these nonaesthetic properties that are important methodologically and epistemologically, and play the crucial role in the aesthetic induction. One of these is metaphysical allegiance. The demand that the totality of fundamental physical theory should exemplify physicalism, and the best available blueprint, are special cases of metaphysical allegiance. Comprehensibility is just one of McAllister's aesthetic properties. Comprehensibility, one might say, is beautiful. It fits perfectly Hutchinson's characterization of beautyas involving "uniformity amidst variety" (see the discussion of "unity through diversity" in Maxwell, 1998, ch. 3).

A more serious disagreement would seem to be that whereas AOE recognizes only one methodologically significant non-empirical property, namely unity or comprehensibility, MAI stresses that there are endlessly many, falling under the five headings of symmetry, invocation of a model, visualizability/ abstractness, metaphysical allegiance and simplicity (related to unity).

This disagreement is not quite as big as it might at first appear to be. Here, very briefly, are the similar, but also different, ways in which AOE and MAI treat unity, symmetry, metaphysical allegiance and simplicity.

Unity: AOE and MAI both recognize that the demand for unity takes a number of different forms, but AOE alone holds that these are aspects of just one, single conception of unity. According to AOE, dynamic unity, postulated to exist by physicalism, can be broken in thought in a number of different ways, this creating a number of different kinds of (relative) disunity, and hence a number of different ways in which degrees of unity (or disunity) can be assessed. But these different kinds of disunity all relate to just one conception of unity, namely that which is postulated to exist by physicalism (seeMAI, too, stresses that there are different kinds of unification (McAllister, 1996, p. 110) but, unlike AOE, does not relate these to one basic conception of unity.

Symmetry: Here, again, AOE and MAI both recognize that the demand for symmetry takes a number of different forms, but AOE alone holds that these, in so far as they are methodologically legitimate within theoretical physics, all relate to the one basic demand for unity. One of the achievements of AOE is to demonstrate clearly how different kinds of symmetry relate to unity, the demand that theories exhibit symmetries itself being an aspect of the demand for unityMAI recognizes that theories exhibit different kinds of symmetry, but fails to recognize that different kinds of symmetry, in theoretical physics at least, are aspects of unity.

Metaphysical allegiance: Once again, both AOE and MAI recognize that an important non-empirical requirement in theoretical physics, upheld by some physicists at least, is that fundamental physical theories should accord with some metaphysical view. Both recognize that metaphysical views associated with physics since Galileo have changed dramatically over time; both recognize that different physicists espouse different metaphysical views at the same time. But AOE and MAI differ here too, in that AOE holds that diverse, evolving level 3 blueprints, in order to be acceptable, need to accord with physicalism, whereas MAI makes no such demand. For AOE, the requirement that a theory exemplifies a metaphysical view, in so far as it is methodologically legitimate, is but an aspect of the basic requirement that the body of fundamental physical theory exemplifies the unity of physicalism (as much as possible). MAI makes no such demand.

Simplicity:

Here, yet again, both AOE and MAI recognize that the demand for simplicity takes a number of different forms; both see simplicity as being related to unity, but in somewhat different waysBut AOE alone relates the demand for simplicity to the more basic demand for just one kind of unity, dynamic unity postulated by physicalism. According to AOE, unity requires that a theory makes the same assertion throughout all possible phenomena to which it applies; simplicity concerns what is asserted for any given phenomenon, and thus presupposes unity. Simplicity presupposes unity, but is quite distinct from unity (see

The difference that this reveals in the two views can be summed up like this. AOE postulates just one basic non-empirical requirement, unity, and relates different requirements, of different kinds of unitysymmetry, metaphysical allegiance and simplicity-to this one demand for unity. MAI, by contrast, holds that there just are many different kinds of requirements-unity, symmetry, metaphysical allegiance and simplicity. Unlike AOE, MAI sees no unity in these diverse kinds of requirements-unity, symmetry, metaphysics and simplicity. (In this respect, AOE might be said to give a more unified, and hence more beautiful, account of scientific method than MAI.) More substantial differences arise in connection with the two remaining kinds of aesthetic properties of theories which MAI holds to be methodologically significant, which I now consider in turn.