This, then, in bare outline, is the kind of academic inquiry that would have emerged from the eighteenth-century Enlightenment if the third great blunder of the Enlightenment had not been made.

But the blunder was made. Instead of the progress-achieving methods of science (generalized to become problem-solving rationality) being applied to social life, scientific method was applied to the task of developing social science alongside natural science. The outcome is what we have (by and large) today: a kind of inquiry that gives intellectual priority to the task of acquiring knowledge, this knowledge, once acquired, being subsequently and secondarily applied to help solve social problems. Rule 3 of problem-solving rationality is put into practice to splendid effect: the outcome is the maze of specialized disciplines of the formal, natural, social and technological sciences, and of scholarship, that go to make up much of academic inquiry today. But rules 1, 2 and 4 are violated. Academic inquiry today, restricted primarily to solving problems of knowledge, is so irrational, in a wholesale and structural way, that three of the four most elementary rules of reason conceivable are violated. Rule 1 is violated because academia can articulate problems of knowledge but cannot, at a fundamental level, articulate problems of living. Rule 2 is violated because academia can propose and critically assess possible solutions to problems of knowledge-theories, observational and experimental results, factual claims of all kinds-but cannot propose and critically assess possible solutions to problems of living-proposals for action, policies, political programmes, political philosophies, philosophies of life. All these latter do not state matters of fact; they embody proposals as to what we should do, how we should live, what we should seek to change and create; they incorporate such things as values, human hopes and fears, policies, strategies for living: they do not constitute potential contributions to knowledge, and are thus excluded from a kind of inquiry devoted to the pursuit of knowledge. Once rules 1 and 2 are violated, rule 4 is necessarily violated as well.

This wholesale, structural irrationality of academic inquiry as it mostly exists today is no mere formal matter. It has far-flung, long-term damaging consequences. It means that knowledge and technological know-how are pursued dissociated intellectually from a more fundamental concern to promote increasingly cooperatively rational tackling of conflicts and problems of living. As I have pointed out (in section 10.2), it is this that is at the root of most of our current global problems.

A kind of inquiry that pursues knowledge and technological knowhow, and fails to give intellectual priority to the tasks of articulating our problems of living, and proposing and criticizing possible solutions (thus violating three of the four most elementary rules of reason conceivable), must inevitably tend to create the kind of global problems we face today, the outcome of possessing much recently acquired power to act, without the power to act wisely. And the more successful such "knowledgeinquiry" is, so the greater the human suffering it is likely to lead to.

Reason is far too important "for everything we cherish" for it to be tolerable that it should be systematically violated in this way.

Here, then, is a major failing of Popper's version of the Enlightenment Programme. Instead of arguing for the need to reject knowledge-inquiry and replace it with the kind of academic inquiry indicated above, "wisdom-inquiry" as it may be called, Popper defends knowledge-inquiry, and even defends pro-naturalist social science.10.5 The New Enlightenment, step (i): from falsificationism to aim-oriented empiricism I come now to a rather more radical revision of Popper's version of the Enlightenment Programme. This begins with a revision of step (i) of the programme. Popper's falsificationism is untenable, and needs to be replaced by a conception of scientific method that I have called aimoriented empiricism (AOE). The reason for this revision, already discussed in Chapters 2, 5 and 7, can be summarized as follows. Science only considers (and only accepts) theories that are sufficiently simple, unified or explanatory, and this means that the methods of science make a persistent metaphysical assumption about the universe, to the effect that it has a simple, unified, explanatory dynamic structure. That such a persistent metaphysical assumption is made by science, as a part of (conjectural) scientific knowledge, contradicts, and refutes, falsificationism. An improved conception of scientific method is required.

In The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1959), Popper claims that the more falsifiable a theory is, so the greater its degree of simplicity. (There is a second method for assessing degrees of simplicity, in terms of number of observation statements required to falsify the theories in question, but Popper stresses that if the two methods clash, it is the first that takes precedence.) It is easy to see that Popper's proposal fails. Given a reasonably simple scientific theory, T, one can readily increase the falsifiability of T by adding on an independently testable hypotheses, h 1 , to form the new theory, T + h 1. This new theory will be more falsifiable than T but, in general, will be drastically less simple. And one can make the situation even worse, by adding on as many independently testable hypotheses as one pleases, h 2 , h 3 and so on, to form new theories T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 + , as highly empirically falsifiable and as drastically lacking in simplicity as one pleases.