1 in Chapter 2).

Whereas MAI gives to science just one aim (empirical adequacy), AOE sees science as having a hierarchy of aims, from empirical adequacy, perhaps, at the highest level, down to the aim to turn the best available level 3 blueprint into a precise, true theory of everything, at the lowest level. (And even more specific, and different, aims are assigned to different branches of natural science.)

That AOE postulates this hierarchical structure to the aims of science, whereas MAI does not, leads to different treatments of changing criteria for theory choice. According to MAI, criteria of theory choice are of two kinds: those that are justified by an appeal to the basic aim of science (empirical adequacy), and those that are justified by inductive projection-the aesthetic criteria arrived at by the aesthetic induction. These latter are weaker than the former, and presuppose, for logical reasons, the former (McAllister, 1996, p. 76). According to AOE, by contrast, all criteria of theory choice are arrived at by aim analysis: those that evolve do so because the level 3 aim of science evolves.

Even though MAI and AOE agree that non-empirical criteria of theory choice change with time, they disagree about which criteria change, and what this change involves. According to AOE, something close to physicalism has been implicit in the methods of theoretical physics since Galileo or Newton; the demand for theoretical unity, associated with physicalism, has been more or less unchanging. What has changed is the form that the demand for unity takes, as manifest in dramatically changing level 3 metaphysical blueprints. MAI does not claim that physicalism, and the requirement of unity associated with it, is a part of the unchanging criteria of theory choice (since Galileo, at least). Nor could MAI claim this, as long as it is a version of SE.

According to AOE, the level 4 thesis of physicalism, and the level 3 best metaphysical blueprint, are arrived at by a quasi-Popperian process of conjecture and criticism, the whole direction of progress in theoretical physics since the birth of modern science (or since the Presocratics) being taken into account. The claim is that these theses make explicit what theoretical physics hopes to achieve: they are intended to be the best conjectures as to what the basic aims of theoretical physics should be, at different levels of specificity. These theses are intended to lead to criteria, to methodological principles such as symmetry principles, that will be relevant for future theories, not yet developed. Indeed, according to AOE, the activity of further articulating the best blueprint, and solving problems of unity to which it gives rise, provides science with a rational, if fallible method of discovery.All this contrasts dramatically with criteria arrived at by the aesthetic induction, according to MAI, which are almost bound to be conservative, and more or less inapplicable to revolutionary developments. AOE criteria anticipate and provoke revolution, and judge the existing body of fundamental physical theory as unsatisfactory because of its failure to comply with the demand for unity (the standard model postulates too many particles and forces, and clashes with general relativity); by contrast, MAI criteria are conservative, and are almost bound to be at odds with revolutionary developmentsAOE criteria are heuristically powerful; MAI criteria are the opposite. Furthermore, AOE criteria, associated with level 3 blueprints, evolve or improve as physics makes progress, and in a way which admits some elements of continuity (see, in particular, Maxwell, 1998, pp. 80-9). MAI sees change, but no overall progress, in non-empirical criteria, and holds, in a quasi-Kuhnian fashion, that revolutions create a rupture in aesthetic criteria, there being no account of the modification and generalization of blueprints, which AOE provides.

MAI and AOE agree that non-empirical criteria apply, not to any specific formulation of a theory, but to what all formulations have in common. But there are somewhat different accounts of what this is. According to MAI, a formulation-independent theory is an abstract entity that exists in its own right, with its own properties distinct from the phenomena the theory postulates (see, for example,This leaves obscure what sort of thing such an abstract entity is, and what its relationship is with a linguistic formulation of the theory, and with the phenomena it predicts. According to AOE, the matter is much more straightforward: a formulation-independent theory, T, is the content of T, what T predicts, or asserts to be the case. AOE does not appeal to the abstract entities of MAI; it appeals only to possible phenomena, not as actually existing entities, but merely as possibilities. The claim that T exhibits a certain symmetry thus amounts to the claim that the phenomena predicted by T exhibit this symmetry. There is here no mystery about the relationship between a linguistic formulation of T, the abstract entity T, and the phenomena T predicts: the "abstract entity" is just what any linguistic formulation of T asserts to be the case, the content of T. This leads to an account of the importance of linguistic-dependent criteria of simplicity