7.3 Two versions of critical rationalism

Even if AOE does not play van Fraassen's mug's game, nevertheless how can it conceivably solve the practical problem of induction given its quasiPopperian character?

Let me say at once that two versions of Popperianism deserve to be distinguished. On the one hand there is Popper's own view, which I shall call, with ironic intent, "dogmatic critical rationalism". This stresses merely the vital role that criticism has for rationality. Criticism is deployed, one might say, in an uncritical or almost dogmatic fashion. In contrast to this there is the version of critical rationalism which I wish to defend, which might be called "critical critical rationalism". This takes seriously the implications of a point emphasized, but not adequately followed up, by Popper, namely, that the whole point of rational criticism is to promote progress-and in connection with science, to promote progress in knowledge (and understanding). This means that theses which are demonstrably such that not accepting them can only harm and cannot help progress in knowledge whatever the universe is like, do not require (rational) criticism. They deserve to be permanently accepted. The cosmological thesis at level 7 of the hierarchy of AOE is accepted on these grounds-in sharp contrast to anything found in Popper's work. Furthermore, it is all important, according to critical critical rationalism, to highlight that part of our knowledge which, we conjecture, it is most fruitful to criticize, from the standpoint of achieving progress in knowledge. Mere criticism is not good enough; we need to be critically critical, critical of criticism itself, directing criticism to that which we conjecture it is most fruitful to criticize from the standpoint of achieving progress. A basic idea behind the hierarchy of AOE is just to display the metaphysical presuppositions of science in such a way that that which, we conjecture, it is most fruitful to criticize be brought to the fore, fruitful criticism being especially facilitated. Criticism needs to be directed, above all, at theses at levels 1, 2 and 3-theses from 4 to 6 becoming increasingly unfruitful to criticize as we ascend the hierarchy, due to their increasing lack of factual content and increasingly indispensable role in the search for knowledge.

7.4 The practical problem of induction

But how does any of this help-the reader may ask with rising impatience-with solving the practical problem of induction? I now address this question head on.

It is important to appreciate that there are three parts to the problem of induction. There is the methodological problem: to specify the precise methods involved in the choice of theory in science. There is the theoretical problem: to show that we are justified in accepting the scientific theories we do accept, granted the aim is to improve theoretical knowledge and understanding of the universe. And, perhaps hardest of all, there is the practical problem: to show that we are justified in accepting those results of science that we do accept, granted our aim is to use these results as a basis for action, such as constructing bridges and producing drugs, lives potentially being lost if the predictions of science turn out to be false. The vast literature on the problem of induction is almost entirely devoted to the practical problem, but this is like trying to fly before you can crawl. The proper place to begin is with the methodological problem: if this has not been solved, to the extent of specifying rigorous methods for science, all efforts to solve the other two problems will be squandered on trying to justify the unjustifiable. This, in essence, is the reason for the long-standing failure of attempts to solve the problem(s) of induction.

Popper's falsificationism, like all other versions of SE, fails at the first hurdle (as I have, in effect, already pointed out above). Methods actually employed in physics involve persistently choosing unifying theories in preference to more empirically successful disunified rival theories. This in turn involves making a big, persistent metaphysical assumption, to the effect that all disunified theories are false. Rigour demands that this (implicit) metaphysical assumption be made explicit, within science, so that it can be criticized and, we may hope, improved. But falsificationism cannot do this, because its criterion of demarcation declares metaphysics to be non-scientific. And no version of SE can do this either, because the metaphysical assumption, implicit in persistent scientific preference for unifying theories against the evidence, is repudiated, denied, by all versions of SE. All SE views about scientific method lack rigour.

And related to the lack of rigour, there is a lack of precise characterization. Presuppositionism, as we have seen, leads to AOE, and to the view that metaphysical assumptions and associated methods evolve with evolving knowledge. No version of SE (including falsificationism) can do adequate justice to this evolving, positive feedback aspect of scientific method.Finally, in order merely to specify precisely what the methods of physics are, it is necessary to specify what unification in theoretical physics is. We have seen in Chapter 4 what this amounts to: the more the content of the totality of fundamental theory in physics is the same throughout all the possible phenomena to which this totality of theory applies, so the more unified it is. What matters is what the totality of theory asserts about the world, not the character or structure of the theory itself. As far as non-empirical requirements for acceptability are concerned, in order to be ultimately acceptable, the totality of fundamental theory must be unified in the strongest sense.