It is in this way, I suggest, that we need to conceive intellectual inquiry: as the open, sustained, responsible discussion of our common problems. Intellectual inquiry needs to be conceived and pursued as the tribal meeting of humanity, permanently in session, open to all, our joint endeavour to develop cooperative, personal responsibility for our common problems. Something must be created to replace the tribal meeting. Intellectual inquiry, at its best, constitutes such a replacement: it is from this standpoint that intellectual inquiry needs to be understood, contributed to and judged.

And only universalism can do justice to this conception of intellectual inquiry. This, indeed, is universalism: intellectual inquiry conceived as the outcome of our personal, cooperative, responsible attempts to improve our solutions to our fundamental problems.The difficulty we experience, then, in putting universalism into practice is an important part of the difficulties we experience in seeking to take on a degree of personal responsibility for our shared world. Specialism is, as Huxley correctly points out, an evasion of responsibility, the outcome of a failure to cope with the stress of responsibility. Specialism can even be seen as the outcome of a kind of intellectual or professional tribalism, the specialist's tribe being the "invisible college" of like-minded specialists.

A number of writers have been concerned to emphasize-in terms somewhat analogous to those outlined here-that the blessings resulting from moving from the intimate, coherent tribe to the big, complex, diversified modern world are mixed. These writers all emphasize, in one way or another, that this transition makes possible the development of choice, freedom, reason, science, on the one hand, but can also lead to uncertainty, fear, loneliness, a sense of meaninglessness and impotence, on the other hand.

Thus in Coming of Age in Samoa Margaret Meadtells us that children in Samoa fail to experience anything like the trauma of adolescence so familiar in Western society. She concludes that this is due to the absence in Samoa of the problem of choosing between rival ways of life and values. Adolescent trauma, then, is due to the great difficulties that we experience in coming to terms with cultural diversity in our societyin turn due, without doubt, to a general failure of our culture to cope adequately with this central problem of diversity. As I have already indicated, in The Openargues that the open society-the society in which diverse ways of life are tolerated-is essential to our humanity, our reason, our civilization. It is only with the existence of social diversity that we can begin to doubt, to criticize, to learn, and perhaps to make progress. In Popper's view, rationality is to be understood primarily in terms of the capacity to doubt, to criticize and thus to learn; criticism, however, is only really possible if a plurality of views and ways of life coexist in society. Thus, for Popper, rationality is to be understood primarily in social terms, arising as a result of social developments-the development of social and cultural diversity, and a tradition of criticism.The development of the open society makes possible the development of both freedom and reason. Popper is at pains to emphasize, however, the price we pay for these developments, the strain that civilization puts upon us. It is indeed a major thesis of The Open Society and Its Enemies that the uncertainties, the emotional stress, created by our movement towards the open society, can be so great that we long passionately for a return to the simplicities and certainties of the monolithic closed society. This anti-rational, anti-humanitarian longing is responsible for the totalitarianism of both left and right. The difficulties that confront us in coming to terms with the open society are indeed, according to Popper, so extreme that even many of our greatest thinkers in the past have failed to surmount them: Heraclitus, Plato, Aristotle, Hegel and Marx all in one way or another, in Popper's view, sought to return us to the closed society. Many of our greatest philosophers and rationalists have been enemies of the open society.It is scarcely surprising, then, that adolescents, emerging from the "closed" society of the family into our quasi-"open" society, should experience difficulties. The problems of adolescence need to be understood in philosophical or rationalistic terms, in terms of emotional reactions to an intense awareness of possibilities and uncertainties, and not merely in terms of some psychological theory of emotional development.

Isaac Bashevis Singer, in his novels and short stories, has given us a wonderfully vivid and perceptive account of the enormous difficulties we encounter in emerging from a closed society.In The Manor (1965a) and The Estate (1975b) Singer provides us with a wholly convincing picture of the confusion, the sense of loss, that overwhelmed those enlightened Jews who, towards the end of the nineteenth century, emerged from the highly traditional, almost mediaeval, Jewish communities still existing then in Poland. Singer's writings are especially noteworthy for the fact that many of his protagonists are themselves deeply conscious of the problem, and not merely affected emotionally by it without any understanding of its nature. Singer is concerned to show us, in a fictional form, individuals grappling passionately with the task of pursuing critical fundamentalist intellectual inquiry. Singer's vivid and honest imagination takes us to the heart of the problems of our civilization.