We might interpret this to mean that when Einstein is thinking primarily as a theoretical physicist, he unthinkingly takes the ultimate comprehensibility of the universe for granted-the key component of aim-oriented empiricism. When he comes to reflect philosophically about the aims and methods of his work, however, his (misconceived) philosophical conscience gets the better of him, and he lapses into standard empiricism. Einstein's scientific instincts, in short, are more enlightened than his philosophical reflections-an important point, implicit in my claim that aim-oriented empiricism arose, for Einstein, out of scientific practice, adopted in response to a severe scientific problem.

Are we to conclude, then, that Einstein did not in the end manage to free himself explicitly from the trap of standard empiricism? One point to remember is that throughout his scientific life Einstein's views on the philosophy of science evolved from something close to Machian positivism at the outset (an extreme version of standard empiricism) to a view that comes to resemble aim-oriented empiricism more and more closely towards the end of his life. Einstein himself put the matter like this, in a letter to Lanczos in 1938:

Coming from sceptical empiricism of somewhat the kind of Mach's, I was made, by the problem of gravitation, into a believing rationalist, that is, one who seeks the only trustworthy source of truth in mathematical simplicity. The logically simple does not, of course, have to be physically true; but the physically true is logically simple, that is, it has unity at the foundation. (seeThis, to begin with, sounds like a clear enough confession of a convinced aim-oriented empiricist. As it stands, it is perhaps something of an oversimplification. In the first place, as we have seen above, elements of aimoriented empiricist thinking can be found in Einstein's scientific work almost from the outset-from Einstein's first great creative period in 1902-5. Second, Einstein's views concerning the philosophy of science went on developing long after the creation of general relativity, right to the end of his life. Our best hope, then, of finding a clear, unambiguous formulation of aim-oriented empiricism is to look at Einstein's very last writings on philosophy of science. I provide two final quotations. The first comes from Einstein's "Autobiographical Notes", written when he was 67. Einstein is discussing the points of view from which physical theories can be critically assessed, quite generally:

The first point of view is obvious: the theory must not contradict empirical facts. … The second point of view is not concerned with the relation to the material of observation but with the premises of the theory itself, with what may briefly but vaguely be characterized as the "naturalness" or "logical simplicity" of the premises (of the basic concepts and of the relations between these which are taken as a basis). This point of view, an exact formulation of which meets with great difficulties, has played an important role in the selection and evaluation of theories since time immemorial. The problem here is not simply one of a kind of enumeration of the logically independent premises (if anything like this were at all unequivocally possible), but that of a kind of reciprocal weighing of incommensurable qualities … Of the "realm" of theories I need not speak here, inasmuch as we are confining ourselves to such theories whose object is the totality of all physical appearances. The second point of view may briefly be characterized as concerning itself with the "inner perfection" of the theory, whereas the first point of view refers to the "external confirmation". The following I reckon as also belonging to the "inner perfection" of a theory: We prize a theory more highly if, from the logical standpoint, it is not the result of an arbitrary choice among theories which, among themselves, are of equal value and analogously constructed.It is surely clear from this that Einstein came quite explicitly to repudiate all versions of standard empiricism towards the end of his life. There is no suggestion here that the second requirement of "inner perfection" or unity is somehow to be reduced to the first requirement of empirical adequacy: empirical considerations do not, for Einstein, alone determine choice of theory. Furthermore, Einstein has made it abundantly clear already that, in his view, in choosing only theories which satisfy the requirement of inner perfection, we are in effect assuming that the universe itself is comprehensible-this being a permanent presupposition of scientific knowledge upheld on non-empirical grounds. But in case there is any doubt on this score, here is a passage written in 1950 in which the thesis that there can be no knowledge without the presupposition that the universe is comprehensible is explicitly affirmed:

It is of the very essence of our striving for understanding that, on the one hand, it attempts to encompass the great and complex variety of man's experience, and that on the other, it looks for simplicity and economy in the basic assumptions. The belief that these two objectives can exist side by side is, in view of the primitive state of our scientific knowledge, a matter of faith. Without such faith I could not have a strong and unshakable conviction about the independent value of knowledge.