For Popper, the most damaging feature of Marx's historicism has to do, perhaps, with the severe limitations that it places on the power of politics, on the capacity of people to solve social problems. Marx is famous for his eleventh thesis on Feuerbach: "The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point however is to change it" (quoted inBut Marx's economic historicism leads immediately to a severely restricted view as to what political intervention can achieve. In Capital he declares: "When a society has discovered the natural law that determines its own movement,  even then, it can neither overleap the natural phases of its evolution, nor shuffle them out of the world by a stroke of the pen. But this much it can do; it can shorten and lessen its birth-pangs" (quoted ibid., p. 86). Just those actions which were to improve the unrestrained capitalism of Marx's time beyond all recognition, namely political intervention and the actions of trade unions, are discounted at the outset by Marx's economic determinism as necessarily impotent. Political planning and policymaking for socialism is condemned by Marx, in line with his central doctrine, as inherently inefficacious and Utopian. One disastrous consequence of this was that when Marxists gained power in Russia, they found their literature contained no guidelines as to how to proceed. Another disastrous consequence was that Marxism, blind to the potency of political power, failed to anticipate the dangers inherent in handing over power to political leaders after the revolution, dangers which, after the Russian Revolution, became all too manifest.

The full force of Popper's criticism is devoted, however, to the central argument of Capital-an argument which seeks to establish the inevitable downfall of capitalism and the triumph of socialism. Popper presents Marx's arguments as having three steps, only the first of which is elaborated in Capital. The first step argues that an inevitable increase in the productivity of work leads to the accumulation of more and more wealth in the ruling class, and the greater and greater poverty and misery of the working class. The second step then argues that all classes will disappear except for a small, wealthy ruling class and a large impoverished working class, this situation inevitably leading to a revolution. The third step argues that the revolution will result in the victory of the working class, which in turn will result in the withering away of the state and the creation of socialism.

Popper demonstrates that none of these steps is inevitable by showing that alternative developments are entirely possible and, in many cases, have actually happened since Marx wrote Capital. Even if there is a tendency under capitalism for the means of production and wealth to be concentrated in fewer and fewer hands (as the first step assumes), the state can intervene to counteract this tendency by such means as taxation and death duties. And as far as the increasing poverty of workers is concerned, this can be counteracted by the formation of trade unions, by collective bargaining backed up by strikes. The brutal, unrestricted capitalism of Marx's time has since been transformed out of all recognition by just such interventionist methods. And Popper makes analogous, decisive points to demolish the second and third steps of Marx's argument. Even if the ruling class did become increasingly wealthy and the working class increasingly poor (as the second step assumes), this does not mean that all classes but these two would necessarily disappear, since landowners, rural workers, and a new middle class may well exist, given Marx's assumptions. And even if violence breaks out, this does not mean it would necessarily constitute the social revolution, as envisaged by Marx. And finally, even if it is granted that the workers unite and overthrow the ruling class (as the third step assumes), this does not mean that a classless society and socialism would necessarily result. It is all too easy to suppose that the new political leaders would seize and hold on to power, justifying this by exploiting and twisting the revolutionary ideology, and by invoking the threat of counter-revolutionary forces. And many other possible outcomes can be envisaged. It is in fact implausible to suppose that the victory of the working class would mean the creation of a classless society, and hence the withering away of the state. (This bald summary does not begin to do justice to the cumulative force of Popper's argument.)

Marx, as we have seen, condemned planning for socialism as Utopian; and in a sense, Popper agrees. Popper distinguishes two kinds of social planning or intervention, which he calls Utopian and piecemeal social engineering. Utopian social engineering seeks to attain an ideal social order, such as socialism, by bringing about holistic changes in society; such an approach is, Popper argues, doomed to failure. Piecemeal social engineering, by contrast, searches for and fights against "the greatest and most urgent evils of society": this is the approach that Popper advocates). Subsequently, during the course of criticizing Marx, Popper points out that piecemeal social engineering can take the form either of state intervention, or of the creation of legal, institutional checks on freedom of action. The latter is to be preferred, Popper argues, as the former carries with it the danger of increasing the power of the state