I read everything I could lay my hands on that Einstein had written about the nature of science, and I discovered, so it seemed to me, that Einstein had actually advocated key tenets of aim-oriented empiricism in an increasingly explicit way as the years went by. He had, however, been ignored and misunderstood because of the powerfully prevailing influence of standard empiricism.Here are my reasons for holding this view.

Einstein invented aim-oriented empiricism in scientific practice in order to overcome a severe scientific crisis. The crisis was the demise of classical physics as a result of Planck's 1900 quantum theory of blackbody radiation. Initially, it was only Einstein who understood just how grave, how wholesale, the crisis was. In his "Autobiographical Notes" he puts the matter like this: it [became] clear to me as long ago as shortly after 1900, i.e. shortly after Planck's trailblazing work, that neither mechanics nor electrodynamics could (except in limiting cases) claim exact validity. By and by I despaired of the possibility of discovering the true laws by means of constructive efforts based on known facts. The longer and the more despairingly I tried, the more I came to the conviction that only the discovery of a universal formal principle could lead us to assured results. The example I saw before me was thermodynamics. The general principle was there given in the theorem: the laws of nature are such that it is impossible to construct a perpetuum mobile (of the first and second kind). How, then, could such a universal principle be found?This, I claim, is the beginning of the explicit employment of aim-oriented empiricism in scientific practice. It is to this that Einstein owed his extraordinary success in discovering special and general relativity. Soon after 1900, Einstein found himself bereft of guidelines as to how to proceed, because Planck's "trailblazing" result had cast into doubt the whole of classical physics. Ordinarily a theoretical physicist can proceed by applying, extending, modifying or reinterpreting existing established physical theory. This is how classical physics had developed so far, after Newton. Einstein, however, found himself in what seemed an unprecedented situation. Existing physical theory-especially Newtonian mechanics and Maxwell-Lorentzian electrodynamics-had to be fundamentally wrong, given Planck's result. A fundamentally new kind of theory was needed to stand in their stead. But, in order to discover this new theory, it would be useless to try to extend or modify existing physical theories, in the ordinary manner, since it was just these theories which were fundamentally wrong. In order to proceed, Einstein was obliged to invent a new method of discovery for theoretical physics-a rational method capable of leading to the discovery of fundamentally new kinds of theories.

Within the framework of standard empiricism there can be no such rational method of discovery. If the only way in which theories can be rationally assessed in physics is by means of empirical success and failure, there can be no rational method for the invention of good, radically new physical theories which are incompatible with existing theories., all of whom defend versions of standard empiricism, not surprisingly all deny the possibility of there being a rational method of discovery of fundamentally new theories or paradigms-theories whose invention and acceptance constitute a "scientific revolution". Kuhn even denies that there can be rational assessment of a revolutionary new theory (with respect to its predecessor). The problem of how to proceed when confronted by wholesale scientific crisis, the breakdown of all existing theoretical knowledge, which Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos failed to solve in principle in the 1930s, 1960s and 1970s, Einstein had already solved in successful scientific practice by the year 1905. He solved it by inventing special relativity.

What, then, is Einstein's new rational method of discovery, which led to the discovery of special and general relativity? It can be put, quite simply, like this. Choose two of the most fundamental physical theories, T 1 and T 2 , say, which are a part of "scientific knowledge" but which contradict each other. Discard everything about T 1 and T 2 that does not seem relevant to the contradiction until two mutually contradictory principles, P 1 and P 2 , are arrived at, P 1 from T 1 and P 2 from T 2 , thus arriving, it is hoped, at the nub of the contradiction between T 1 and T 2. Modify P 1 or P 2 (or both) or relevant background assumptions to resolve the contradiction into a new unified principle, P 3 (a synthesis of a transformed P 1 and P 2 ). Take P 3 as the basis for a new theory, T 3 , which unifies T 1 and T 2 .

In order for this method of discovery to be a rational one to adopt, one crucial assumption must be made: the universe has some kind of discoverable unified structure, of which our present fundamental physical theories give us limited, approximate (and incompatible) glimpses. Given the truth of this assumption, we have rational grounds for holding that the method can lead to success. If the assumption is false, we have no such grounds. As we shall see, Einstein seems only to have fully understood this point after the discovery of general relativity.