But the adoption of this "requirement of simplicity" (as Popper calls it) as a basic methodological principle of science, has the effect of permanently excluding from science all ad hoc theories (such as T + h 1 + h 2 + h 3 ) that fail to satisfy the principle, however empirically successful such theories might be if considered. This amounts to assuming permanently that the universe is such that no ad hoc theory, that fails to satisfy Popper's principle of simplicity, is true. It amounts to accepting, as a permanent item of scientific knowledge, the substantial metaphysical thesis that the universe is non-ad hoc, in the sense that no theory that fails to satisfy Popper's principle of simplicity is true. But this clashes with Popper's criterion of demarcation: that no unfalsifiable, metaphysical thesis is to be accepted as a part of scientific knowledge.

It is, in fact, important that Popper's criterion of demarcation is rejected, and the metaphysical thesis of non-ad hocness is explicitly acknowledged to be a part of scientific knowledge. The thesis, in the form in which it is implicitly adopted at any given stage in the development of science, may well be false. Scientific progress may require that it be modified. The thesis needs to be made explicit, in other words, for good Popperian reasons, namely so that it can be critically assessed, and perhaps improved. As long as Popper's demarcation criterion is upheld, the metaphysical thesis must remain implicit, and hence immune to criticism.

Popper's falsificationism can be modified, however, so that substantial metaphysical theses, implicit in methods that exclude ad hoc theories, are made explicit within science, and are thus rendered available to critical scrutiny and revision (as we shall see in subsequent chapters; see also

On publication, L.Sc.D. achieved a certain impact; it was quite widely reviewed and discussed, and led to Popper being invited to give lectures in England, Denmark and elsewhere. Popper himself later claimed that his criticisms of logical positivism led eventually to the downfall of that doctrine.

1.5 The Open Society

Having dealt with the methodology of the natural sciences, Popper turned his attention again to what had long been of concern to him: the intellectual defects of Marxism, and the philosophy of the social sciences. But before he could get very far with that work, Popper was offered a lectureship at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand. He accepted, and Popper and his wife left Vienna for New Zealand early in 1937.

For some years Popper had been privately highly critical of policies of socialists in Germany and Austria for playing into the hands of the Fascists and Hitler. This was due, in Popper's view, to the harmful influence of Marxism. But he had kept these criticisms to himself, as he felt any public criticism could only weaken the forces opposing Hitler. Then, in March 1938, Hitler occupied Austria, and Popper felt all grounds for restraint had disappeared. He decided to put his criticisms of Marxism, and his views on the social sciences, into a publishable form.

He began work on what was to become The Poverty of Historicism. But then, unexpectedly, sections on essentialism, and on totalitarian tendencies in Plato, grew and grew (driven by the desperation of the times), and Popper found he had a new work on his hands: it became what is perhaps his best known, most influential and greatest work, The Open Society and ItsWithout referring anywhere to Hitler or Stalin, the book is, nevertheless, an urgent and passionate investigation into the problem and threat of totalitarianism, whether of the right or left. It seeks to understand what the appeal of totalitarianism can be, and why it should have come to be such a threat to civilization. Popper regarded the writing of the book as his contribution to the war effort.

In The Open Society and Its Enemies (O.S.E.), Popper argues that a fundamental problem confronting humanity is that of moving from a closed, tribal way of life to an open society. The closed society is a society that has just one view of the world, one set of values, one basic way of life. It is a world dominated by dogma, fixed taboos and magic, devoid of doubt and uncertainty. The open society, by contrast, tolerates diversity of views, values and ways of life. In the open society learning through criticism is possible just because diverse views and values are tolerated. For Popper, the open society is the civilized society, in which individual freedom and responsibility, justice, democracy, humane values, reason and science can flourish.

But moving from the closed to the open society imposes a great psychological burden on the individuals involved, "the strain of civilization". Instead of the security of the tribe, organic, dogmatic and devoid of doubt, there is all the uncertainty and insecurity of the open society, the painful necessity of taking personal responsibility for one's life in a state of ignorance, the lack of intimacy associated with the "abstract society", in which individuals constantly rub shoulders with strangers. This transition from the closed to the open society is, for Popper, "one of the deepest revolutions through which mankind has passed" (1966a, vol. 1, p. 175). Many cannot bear the burden of freedom and doubt, and long for the false security and certainties of the closed society. In particular, some of the greatest thinkers of Western civilization have given into this temptation and have, in one way or another, urged upon long-suffering humanity a return to something like a closed society under the guise of Utopia. This is true of Plato and Aristotle; and it is true, in more recent times, of Hegel and Marx. The lure of totalitarianism is built deep in our history and traditions.