, ch. 4). 12. The two prescriptions for formulating empirically more successful rivals to accepted unifying theories, indicated in this and the previous paragraph, can of course be combined to create further more empirically successful disunified rival theories. 13. This needs to be amended in two ways. In the first place any number of approximate disunified theories would be implied by the true, unified "theory of everything" (supposing there is such a thing). If, for example, we take Newtonian theory as standing in for the true, unified theory of everything, then we can derive from this theory a combination of appropriately approximate versions of Kepler's laws of planetary motion and Galileo's laws of terrestrial motion, which, put together, constitute a disunified theory, true if Newtonian theory is true. "Science assumes that the universe is such that no disunified theory is true", must be amended to read, "Science assumes that the universe is such that no precise disunified theory is true". But even this amendment is not sufficient. Newtonian theory implies different, precise laws of planetary motion for the different planets in their orbits round the sun. Gather these precise laws together, and one has a precise but thoroughly disunified theory of planetary motion. These laws are, however, specific to precise specifications of initial conditions: initial relative positions and velocities, and masses. These laws cease to be true (granted that Newtonian theory is true), if the initial conditions are changed even slightly (in a way which does not obtain during the orbit of the planet in question). In other words, these laws cease to be consequences of Newtonian theory the moment they are interpreted to apply to a range of values of initial conditions (of the indicated kind), however minute this range of values might be. We must amend the statement in the text to read: "Science assumes that the universe is such that no precise disunified theory is true, where the components of the disunified theory are interpreted to apply to a range of values of initial conditions (of the appropriate kind), however minute that range might be." What does "of the appropriate kind" mean here? It means this. Variables that characterize initial conditions are "of the appropriate kind", if the component laws of the disunified theory apply only to different values of these variables. These variables are such, in other words, that in order to move from conditions for which one component law of the disunified theory applies, to conditions for which another component law applies, it is the value of these variables that we need to change. The range of values must not correspond to different states of the physical system that evolve from just one precise initial state of the system. 14. For a much more detailed exposition of this refutation of standard empiricism, seeSee also Maxwell (2017a, ch. 4). 15. For discussion of the claim that Kuhn and Lakatos defend versions of SE, seeBayesianism might seem to reject SE, in acknowledging both prior and posteriori probabilities. But Bayesianism tries to conform to the spirit of SE as much as possible, by regarding prior probabilities as personal, subjective and non-rational, their role in theory choice being reduced as rapidly as possible by empirical testing (see17. What does it mean to say that U 2 is an "improvement" over U 1 , U 2 being "closer" to the true characterization of the unity of nature, T (supposing there is such a thing) than U 1 is? This problem can be solved by exploiting the solution to the problem of verisimilitude, which I have spelled out in some detail elsewhere (see). The problem of verisimilitude is this: What does it mean to say that physics makes progress towards the truth, if it advances from one false theory to another? What does it mean, in other words, to say that fundamental physical theory T 2 is closer to the truth than T 1 , if both T 2 and T 1 are false? Let T, as before, represent the truth-the true "theory of everything". Then we can say that T 2 is closer to the truth than T 1 if T approximately implies T 2 , and T 2 approximately implies T 1 , but T 1 does not approximately imply T 2. The key notion of "approximately implies" can be illustrated by means of the way Newtonian theory approximately implies Kepler's law that planets move in ellipses. There are three steps. First, Newtonian theory is restricted to systems consisting of rather few bodies that move within a finite spatial region. Second, the masses of all the bodies but one tend to zero which, in the limit, leads to the bodies of zero mass tracing out ellipses round the remaining massive body. Third, the resulting laws are reinterpreted to apply to systems of bodies such that one body (the sun) is very much more massive than all the others (the planets), these others nevertheless having masses greater than zero. (It is this third step that introduces error.) More generally, T 2 approximately implies T 1 if a theory simulating the empirical predictions of T 1 can be extracted from T 2 by means of a finite number of steps of the kind just illustrated: T 2 is restricted in scope; non-zero physical variables tend to zero; laws applicable to precise values of variables are reinterpreted to apply to a range of values of physical variables. (For more details, see the works to which I have just referred.) We can now exploit this solution to the problem of verisimilitude to explicate what it means to say that the metaphysical thesis of unity, U 2 , is closer to T than U 1. Let T 2 and T 1 be theories that accord with, or exemplify, U 2 and U 1 respectively. U 2 can be said to be closer to T than U 1 if T 2 is closer to the truth, T, than T 1 is, and there are no theories, T 2 * and T 1 *, exemplifying U 2 and U 1 respectively such that T 1 * is closer to the truth than T 2 *. 18. For example, Gordon Fleming (personal communication). 19. How can level 3 assumptions, or assumptions higher up in the hierarchy, both influence, and be influenced by, level 2 theories? What makes this possible is the feature of the hierarchy about to be indicated in the text, namely that, as one goes up the hierarchy, assumptions are more and more firmly upheld. Level 2 theories that accord with the best available level 3 assumption tend to be favoured over rivals that do not so accord. Nevertheless, a level 2 theory that clashes with the current level 3 assumption, but (a) accords with the level 4 assumption, and (b) is more empirically successful than theories that are in accord with the best level 3 assumption, will be accepted, and will lead to the rejection, or modification, of the level 3 assumption with which it clashes. Consider, however, a theory that clashes, not just with level 3, but with level 4 as well, even though it is compatible with level 5, in such a way that no version of the idea that the universe is physically comprehensible, at level 4, can be rendered compatible with the theory. Such a theory would have to meet with far greater, sustained empirical success before it led to the overthrow of the current level 4 assumption. It would have to lead to empirical research programmes across a broad front of natural science even more successful than current science, based on the current level 4 assumption, before it would become acceptable. And this would be the case even more, given a theory that clashes with the current level 5 assumption. In short, an assumption at a given level may, for much of the time, determine choices lower down in the hierarchy; but every now and again, it may itself be revised, because the revised version accords better with the assumption above or is more empirically fruitful, or, more likely, both of these simultaneously. 20. Corresponding to each cosmological thesis, at level 3 to 7, there is a more or less problematic aim for theoretical physics: to specify that cosmological thesis as a true, precise, testable, experimentally confirmed "theory of everything". The aim corresponding to level 7 is relatively unproblematic: circumstances will never arise such that it would serve the interests of acquiring knowledge to revise this aim. As one descends the hierarchy of cosmological assumptions, the corresponding aims become increasingly problematic, increasingly likely to be unrealizable, just because the corresponding assumption becomes increasingly likely to be false. Whereas upper-level aims and methods will not need revision, lower-level aims and methods, especially those corresponding to level 3, will need to be revised as science advances. Thus lower-level aims and methods evolve within the fixed framework of upper-level aims and methods. 21. Some features of AOE may seem reminiscent of Laudan's "normative naturalism" (see