Such theories can even be concocted which are more empirically successful than NT, by arbitrarily modifying NT, in just this entirely ad hoc fashion, so that the theories yield correct predictions where NT does not, as in the case of the orbit of Mercury, for example (which very slightly conflicts with NT).This last point may be made more generally, as follows. Most accepted physical theories, for most of the time that they exist, are confronted by various empirical difficulties. Let T be any one of the above unifying accepted theories-NT, CEM, or whatever. Typically, T is confronted by the following empirical conditions. There is a domain A of phenomena for which the predictions of T are wholly successful; there is a domain B for which T fails to predict the phenomena because the equations of the theory cannot be solved; there is a domain C where T is ostensibly refuted (because the predictions of T clash with the phenomena of C, but this may be due, not to T yielding false predictions, but to experimental error, or relevant physical conditions not being taken into account); and finally there is a domain D of phenomena which T fails to predict because they lie outside the scope of T. (Here the phenomena, in A to D, are to be understood as consisting of low-level empirical or experimental laws.) It is now easy to concoct rivals to T that are much more empirically successful than T, as follows. One such rival asserts: as far as phenomena in A are concerned, everything occurs as T asserts; as far as phenomena in B are concerned, the phenomena occur in accordance with established empirical laws; and the same for C, and for D. This rival to T, T* let us call it, reproduces all the empirical success of T (in A), successfully predicts phenomena that T is not able to predict (in B), successfully predicts phenomena that refute T (in C), and successfully predicts new phenomena that lie beyond the predictive scope of T (in D). It might be demanded that T* should predict new phenomena; but this demand can be met too, since "phenomena", here, are laws with content in excess of actual experiments that have been performed. T* satisfies every imaginable requirement for being an empirically more successful theory than T.And this has been the situation for all the accepted fundamental physical theories indicated above, for most of the time that they have been in existence: endlessly many rival, disunified theories have been available, far more successful empirically than the accepted, unifying theories, and these empirically more successful, grossly disunified or, as I have called them, "aberrant" theories (see) are all ignored.

As most physicists and philosophers of physics would accept, two criteria are employed in physics in deciding what theories to accept and reject: (1) empirical criteria, and (2) criteria that have to do with the simplicity and unifying capacity of the theories in question. (2) is absolutely indispensable, to such an extent that there are endlessly many theories empirically more successful than accepted theories, which lack unity, and are not even considered as a result. Now comes the crucial point. In persistently accepting unifying theories, and excluding infinitely many empirically more successful, disunified or aberrant rival theories, science in effect makes a big assumption about the nature of the universe, to the effect that it is such that no disunified theory is true, however empirically successful it may appear to be for a time. Furthermore, without some such big assumption as this, the empirical method of science collapses. Science would be drowned in an infinite ocean of empirically successful disunified theories.

If scientists only accepted theories that postulate atoms, and persistently rejected theories that postulate different basic physical entities, such as fields-even though many field theories can easily be, and have been, formulated which are even more empirically successful than the atomic theories-the implications would surely be quite clear. Scientists would in effect be assuming that the world is made up of atoms, all other possibilities being ruled out. The atomic assumption would be built into the way the scientific community accepts and rejects theories-built into the implicit methods of the community, methods which include rejecting all theories that postulate entities other than atoms, whatever their empirical success might be. The scientific community would accept the assumption that the universe is such that no non-atomic theory is true.

Just the same holds for a scientific community which rejects all disunified or aberrant rivals to accepted theories, even though these rivals would be even more empirically successful if they were considered. Such a community in effect makes the assumption: the universe is such that no disunified theory is true.

Thus the idea that science has the aim of improving knowledge of factual truth, nothing being presupposed about the nature of the universe independently of evidence, is untenable. Science makes one big, persistent assumption about the universe, namely that it is such that no disunified or aberrant theory is true. 13 It assumes that the universe is such that there are no pockets of peculiarity, at specific times and places, or when specific conditions arise (gold spheres, gold and diamond dust, etc.), that lead to an abrupt change in laws that prevail elsewhere. Science assumes, in other words, that there is a kind of uniformity of physical laws throughout all phenomena, actual and possible. Furthermore, science must make this assumption (or some analogous assumption) if the empirical method of science is not to break down completely. The empirical method of science of assessing theories in the light of evidence can only work if those infinitely many empirically successful but disunified theories are permanently excluded from science independently of, or rather in opposition to, empirical considerations; to do this is just to make the big, permanent assumption about the nature of the universe.