, ch. 5, sections 5 and 6). 5. Einstein put it very clearly in a paper published in 1911. He states that as a result of assuming the equivalence of acceleration and gravitation for all phenomena "we obtain a principle that, if it really is correct, possesses great heuristic significance. For by means of theoretical considerations of processes that take place relative to a uniformly accelerated reference system, we obtain conclusions about the course of processes in a homogeneous gravitational field" (quoted in Stachel, 2007, p. 85). 6. For a more detailed discussion of the role played by the rotating disc in the genesis of general relativity, see. 7. Einstein had to labour long and hard to transform the initial insight of 1911 or 1912, that gravitation is due to the curvature of space-time, into the field equations of general relativity, first formulated in their final form in 1915. For a magnificent detailed account by a number of authors of Einstein's creation of general relativity, see. See also Pitts (2016). For much earlier accounts, see Pais (1982, chs. 11 and 12) and. Authoritative and detailed as all these accounts are, none tells the story of Einstein's discovery of general relativity as the implementation of aim-oriented empiricism, as I have tried to do, all too briefly, here. 8. Good expositions of general relativity are to be found in. For a lively, non-technical account of the genesis of the theory and its subsequent applications to astrophysics and cosmology, with the emphasis on accounts of the physicists involved, see Ferreira (2014). 9. The best "blueprint" for physics is the best available idea as to how the universe is physically comprehensible, a vital element of theoretical scientific knowledge according to aim-oriented empiricism (see Chapters 2 and 5). 10. Lucid summaries of these papers are to be found in. They are reproduced, translated into English, in Stachel (1998). 11. He did this, too, in the introduction to his 1905 paper introducing the revolutionary idea of light quanta. He there makes clear that there is a fundamental clash between the idea of the particle, associated with theories of matter, and the field idea of Maxwell's theory of electrodynamics (see). 12. Elsewhere, I have suggested that the way to implement this method of discovery is to take, as P 1 , the general idea of deterministic dynamic space-time geometry (from general relativity), and to take, as P 2 , the general idea of ontological probabilism (from quantum theory), the task then being to create unified probabilistic dynamic geometry, P 3 (see Maxwell, 1985, pp. 40-1). 13. All Einstein's great contributions to physics arose out of tackling aspects of the clash between Newton and Maxwell-between the classical theories of gravitation and electromagnetism. In seeking to unify general relativity and classical electrodynamics, Einstein was, in a sense, still tackling the problem of his youth, updated by the replacement of Newton's theory of gravitation with his own theory, general relativity. 14. For an account of the great battle between Einstein and Bohr (and others) see. 15. Interpreting the ψ-function as describing quantum reality directly, measurement having no fundamental role in the theory, has the consequence that quantum superpositions never disappear. Not only does Schrödinger's cat persist as a superposition of being dead and alive, we persist as a superposition of observing the cat dead and alive when we open the box and look. These consequences might seem sufficient to rule out this interpretation of the theory. They did not prevent Hugh Everett from putting forward this interpretation of quantum theory long ago, in 1957. Recently, the Everett version of quantum theory has become almost fashionable: see Wallace (2012) for a recent exposition and defence. For critical assessments, seeand Maxwell (2017b, ch. 5, section 6). 16. See also. See also Chapter 8 of the present volume. 17. The six fatal defects of OQT that I have indicated all stem from the failure of OQT to solve the fundamental quantum wave/ particle problem. We can draw an important conclusion from this point: no version of quantum theory (QT) is acceptable which fails to solve the wave/ particle problem. This constitutes a decisive objection to the currently fashionable Everett or "many-worlds" interpretation of QT: it provides no solution to the wave/ particle problem. It does not tell us what sort of physical entity in space and time the electron, photon or atom is. The probabilistic version of QT, to be outlined in Chapter 8, here scores a striking victory over Everett QT. Probabilistic QT provides us with a very natural solution to the wave/ particle problem, as we shall see in Chapter 8. 18. "Perfection of means and confusion of goals seem-in my opinion-to characterize our age"