

It must be admitted that in recent years many more voices have been raised against rampant specialization. Interdisciplinary, crossdisciplinary, transdisciplinary, multidisciplinary and post-disciplinary are now buzzwords to an extent that was hardly the case a decade or so ago. These buzz terms now almost denote specialized fields of study in their own right. But this seems at most to involve encouraging interdisciplinary research, setting up interdisciplinary courses of various kinds, and perhaps creating interdisciplinary research groups, centres and journals. What it does not involve is transforming the overall structure and character of universities so that an arena is created for the sustained, informal, imaginative and critical discussion of fundamental problems-discussion that influences and is influenced by more specialized research. Nor does it involve the kind of radical transformation of the whole relationship between the university and society that is required by universalism.

Another indication of attempts to develop a more socially responsive science is the emphasis that research funding bodies give to the importance of impact-that is, social impact-in deciding what research projects to support. But here again this development is little more than a botched version of what is really needed. Demanding that research projects, in order to gain financial support, must have impact, may well lead to research being funded that has considerable social impact that is of little real value, or even impact that is harmful. On the other hand, research projects that have no immediate impact whatsoever, but nevertheless are of great potential intellectual value, or potential social value that may only come to fruition decades into the future, are likely to receive no funding at all. Impact may actually degrade the intellectual and social value of science. Holding impact to be important is no substitute for recognizing the inherently and profoundly problematic character of the aims of science, imbued as they are with problematic assumptions concerning metaphysics, values and social use, there thus being the need to subject aims to sustained imaginative and critical exploration as an integral part of scientific inquiry itself. Research scientists and groups, funding bodies, governments and industry may make decisions as to which research projects are, and are not, supported financially. Such decision-making needs to be bathed, however, in sustained imaginative and critical exploration of problematic possibilities. This does not take place at present because the current orthodox conception of science does not permit it, or fails to insist that scientific rigour requires it to take place. What we need, in short, is the implementation of a new conception of science, a new conception of rational inquiry-universalism, or critical speciofundamentalism. Impact is no substitute.

In some respects, things have got worse in the last few decades. There has been the growth of various anti-rationalist creeds within sections of academia: post-modernism, the "strong programme" within the sociology and history of science, social constructivist views about scientific knowledge. This is in turn has led some scientists and philosophers of science to defend orthodox conceptions of science and reason. It all came to a head with the publication of Alan Sokal's spoof article, "Transgressing the Boundaries" (reprinted in). The so-called "Science Wars" that resulted have amounted to little more than a distraction from what really does need to be debated:What kind of inquiry can best help us learn how to realize what is of value in life, for ourselves and others? What kind of inquiry can best help humanity learn how to create a better world-or at least learn how to avoid some of the worst possible future worlds?My own specialized field of research (in so far as I have one), namely philosophy of science, has suffered what I can only see as a degrading splintering into diverse specialized sub-disciplines. When I began my academic career, in the mid 1960s, the debate between Popper and Kuhn was all the rage. There was the idea that both history and philosophy of science together have the profound task of understanding how scientific progress has come about-this astonishing record of progress in knowledge and technology across generations and centuries that has transformed the world. There was even the idea that much may be learnt from scientific progress about how progress may be achieved in other areas of human life, where it falters and where it is urgently needed-above all, social progress towards a better, wiser world. This optimistic and inspiring nascent research programme was then dealt a series of hammer blows. First, adherents of the Edinburgh "strong programme", and of social constructivism more generally, denied that there is any such thing as scientific progress-or at least abolished the idea from history of science as illegitimate "Whiggishness". Then philosophers of science fell to the lure of specialism. Philosophy of science, instead of becoming what was needed, the more general philosophy of inquiry, degenerated into the philosophy of physics, biology, chemistry, neuroscience, computing, geology, microbiology, etc., etc. The fundamental problems of the discipline disappeared from view, and an ever growing army of specialists fell upon an ever expanding domain of specialized puzzles.