

OQT is an extraordinarily successful theory empirically, perhaps the most successful in the whole of physics when one takes into account the range, immense diversity, and accuracy of its predictions. But not only does it fail to solve the great quantum mystery of what sort of entities electrons and atoms can be in view of their apparently contradictory particle and wave properties. It also fails to answer the other childishly elementary question: Is the quantum domain deterministic or probabilistic? The basic dynamic equation of OQT, Schrödinger's time-dependent equation, is deterministic in character. It tells us that quantum states, given by Ψ, evolve deterministically in time, as long as no measurements are made. But this does not mean OQT asserts that the quantum domain is deterministic. First, given OQT, Ψ cannot be interpreted as specifying the actual physical state of a quantum system, just because OQT fails to solve the wave/ particle dilemma, and thus fails to provide a consistent specification of the physical nature of quantum systems when not being measured. Given OQT, Ψ must be interpreted as containing no more than information about the outcome of performing measurements. Second, OQT in general makes probabilistic predictions about the outcome of performing measurements, not (apart from exceptional circumstances) deterministic predictions. But one cannot conclude from this that OQT asserts that the quantum domain is fundamentally probabilistic in character, some physical states of affairs only determining what occurs subsequently only probabilistically. This is because, according to OQT, probabilistic outcomes only occur when we intervene, and make a measurement. In the absence of measurement, nothing probabilistic occurs at all, according to OQT. Indeed, if the process of measurement is treated quantum mechanically, then nothing probabilistic occurs at all, precisely because the basic dynamic equation of OQT, Schrödinger's time-dependent equation, is deterministic.

The inability of OQT to answer these two elementary questions is in itself a serious failure of the theory. But there are, as a consequence, a host of further failures and defects. Because OQT is about the results of performing measurements on quantum systems (and not about quantum systems per se, due to its failure to solve the wave/ particle problem), in order to come up with physical predictions, OQT must consist of two parts, (1) quantum postulates, and (2) some part of classical physics for a treatment of measurement.

is indispensable.

(1) alone, precisely because OQT lacks its own quantum ontology, cannot predict anything physical at all-or at least can only make conditional predictions of the form: if such and such a measurement is made, such and such will be the outcome with such and such a probability. Thus OQT = QP + CP, where "QP" stands for the quantum mechanical postulates of the theory, and "CP" stands for the classical postulates, required for measurement.

In what follows, a quantum "measurement" is a process that actually detects quantum systems; a process which prepares a quantum system to be in a certain quantum state, but does not detect the system, is a "preparation" rather than a "measurement".

OQT, construed as QP + CP, as it must be, is a seriously defective theory. (a) OQT is imprecise, due to the inherent lack of precision of the notion of "measurement". How complex and macroscopic must a process be before it becomes a measurement? Does the dissociation of one molecule amount to a measurement? Or must a thousand or a million molecules be dissociated before a measurement has been made? Or must a human being observe the result? No precise answer is forthcoming. (b) OQT is ambiguous, in that if the measuring process is treated as a measurement, the outcome is in general probabilistic, but if this process is treated quantum mechanically, the outcome is determinisitic. (c) OQT is very seriously ad hoc, in that it consists of two incompatible, conceptually clashing parts, QP and CP. OQT only avoids being a straightforward contradiction by specifying, in an arbitrary, ad hoc way, that QP applies to the quantum system up to the moment of measurement, and CP applies to the final measurement result. (d) OQT is nonexplanatory, in part because it is ad hoc, and no ad hoc theory is fully explanatory, in part because OQT must presuppose some part of what it should explain, namely classical physics. OQT cannot fully explain how classical phenomena emerge from quantum phenomena because some part of classical physics must be presupposed for measurement. (e) OQT is limited in scope in that it cannot, strictly speaking, be applied to the early universe in conditions which lacked preparation and measurement devices. Strictly speaking, indeed, it can only be applied if physicists are around to make measurements. (f) OQT is limited in scope in that it cannot be applied to the cosmos as a whole, since this would require preparation and measurement devices that are outside the cosmos, which is difficult to arrange. Quantum cosmology, employing OQT, is not possible. (g) For somewhat similar reasons, OQT is such that it resists unification with general relativity. Such a unification would presumably involve attributing some kind of quantum state to space-time itself (general relativity being a theory of space-time). But, granted the basic structure of OQT, this would require that preparation and measurement devices exist outside space-time, again not easy to arrange.