It is hardly too much to say that academic inquiry, as it exists today, is the outcome of developing and institutionalizing the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century, and the Enlightenment Programme of the eighteenth century.

The Enlightenment was of course opposed by the Romantic movement. This put its faith in emotion, imagination, spontaneity, inspiration, art, genius, and opposed the Enlightenment faith in science and reason. This Romantic opposition to the Enlightenment, to science and reason, is still influential today in such fields as politics, education, anti-science movements, the arts. And it is still influential in some parts of academic inquiry, in such areas as philosophy, cultural studies, anthropology. Postmodernism comes out of the Romantic movement.But in objecting to the rationalism of the Enlightenment, Romanticism entirely missed the point. For the Traditional Enlightenment, inherited from the eighteenth century, suffers, not from too much reason, but from not enough. It amounts to a characteristic kind of irrationality masquerading as rationality. In developing the basic Enlightenment idea intellectually, the philosophes botched the job; and unfortunately it is this botched, irrational version of the Enlightenment Programme that we now have built into the intellectual and institutional structure of the academic enterprise. Academic inquiry today, when judged from the standpoint of helping us create a better world, is damagingly irrational in a wholesale, structural way.There are three steps that need to be got right to put the basic Enlightenment idea into practice correctly:

(i) The progress-achieving methods of science need to be correctly identified. (ii) These methods need to be correctly generalized so that they become fruitfully applicable to any worthwhile, problematic human endeavour, whatever the aims may be, and not just applicable to the endeavour of improving knowledge. (iii) The correctly generalized progress-achieving methods then need to be exploited correctly in the great human endeavour of trying to make social progress towards an enlightened, civilized world.

Unfortunately, the philosophes of the Enlightenment got all three points disastrously wrong. They failed to capture correctly the progress-achieving methods of natural science (in that they defended inductivist, or at least verificationist, conceptions of science); they failed to generalize these methods properly; and, most disastrously of all, they failed to apply them properly so that humanity might learn how to become more civilized or enlightened by rational means. Instead of applying the generalized progress-achieving methods of science to social life itself, so that social progress might be achieved, the philosophes sought to apply scientific method merely to social science. Reason (as construed by the philosophes) got applied, not to the task of making social progress towards an enlightened world, but to the task of making intellectual progress towards greater knowledge about the social world. Social inquiry was developed, not as social methodology or social philosophy, but as social science. That the philosophes made these blunders in the eighteenth century is forgivable; what is unforgivable is that these blunders still remain unrecognized and uncorrected today, over two centuries later. Instead of correcting the blunders, we have allowed our institutions of learning to be shaped by them as they have developed throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, so that now the blunders are an all-pervasive feature of academia, as we shall see in more detail in a moment.

10.3 Popper's contribution to the Enlightenment Programme

As I have already indicated, Popper made enormously important improvements to the Enlightenment Programme inherited from the eighteenth century. Inductivism and verificationism become falsificationism. Traditional conceptions of reason, with all the emphasis on proof and justification, become critical rationalism. These improvements, at steps (i) and (ii) of the Enlightenment Programme, become all-important when it comes to step (iii): the application of reason to social life, to politics, to problems of living, to political philosophy. As a result of bringing about a revolution in our conception of scientific method, and of rationality more generally, Popper in effect transforms the very idea of "the rational society", so that this ceases to be something that is morally and politically abhorrent, and becomes both highly desirable, and achievable, instead.

Given traditional, pre-Popperian conceptions of science and reason, which tend to see science as establishing secure knowledge of truth by means of evidence, and tend to see reason as establishing truth by means of deductive argument, the "rational society" can only be a society determined, or at least severely constrained, by "the rules of reason". Reason becomes a kind of tyrant. Individual liberty, diversity of views and ways of life, wayward imagination, disagreement and protest would all be suppressed by the iron rule of reason and logic. Granted such verificationist, authoritarian conceptions of reason, 8 the "rational society" can only be regarded as a kind of nightmarish totalitarian state, the very opposite of democracy and liberalism.No wonder the Romantics protested.

But Popper's revolutionary ideas about science and reason change all this dramatically. First, granted Popper's falsificationist conception of scientific method, imagination plays a crucial role in science. Imagination is needed to dream up new wild speculations, subsequently to be submitted to ferocious attempts at empirical refutation. Second, plurality of conflicting theories is absolutely essential for scientific progress, not only to increase the store of theories to be submitted to attempted refutation, but in order to ensure that theories are severely tested in the first place. As I have already mentioned, in order to make sense of the idea of severe testing, we need to see the experimentalist as having at least the germ of an idea for a rival theory up his sleeve (otherwise testing might degenerate into performing essentially the same experiment again and again). This means experiments are always crucial experiments, attempts at trying to decide between two competing theories. Theoretical pluralism is necessary for science to be genuinely empirical.