

An extremely interesting and original defence of the thesis that aesthetic considerations do quite properly influence theory choice in science has, however, been put forward recently by James. Quite independently, I have, over a number of years, developed a view which resembles McAllister's view in a number of striking ways, but which is also different in important respects, namely aim-oriented empiricism (see Chapters 2, 4 and 5). 1 In this chapter I compare and contrast the two views. My own view, aim-oriented empiricism, has already been expounded and defended. I begin with a sketch McAllister's view. I then discuss how the two views resemble, and differ from, each other. And finally, I discuss the question of which is to be preferred.

6.2 The model of the aesthetic induction

In what follows I call McAllister's account of the role of non-empirical, aesthetic factors in the selection of theories in science "the model of the aesthetic induction" (MAI). Here, in summary, is his view.

According to MAI, the basic aim of science is to develop a body of theory that successfully predicts all observable phenomena. MAI holds that from this aim of "empirical adequacy", we can arrive at the following criteria for assessing theories: success in predicting existing empirical data, success in predicting new phenomena, consistency with other highlevel theories, explanatory power and internal consistency.

Many scientists have, however, declared that aesthetic considerations, in addition to the above, play a vital role in both the discovery and acceptance of theories in science. Dirac, Einstein and many others have stressed the importance of aesthetic considerations, such as beauty, elegance, harmony, uniformity amidst variety, simplicity, symmetry. MAI holds that such criteria do indeed have an important role to play in deciding what theories are accepted, to the extent, even, on occasions, of overriding empirical considerations.

But, according to MAI, in so far as such aesthetic considerations exercise a rational influence over choice of theory in science, two crucial points need to be borne in mind. First, theories must be considered to be abstract entities, distinct from this or that linguistic formulation. Second, what matters is not the (subjective) aesthetic judgements themselves, but rather objective, non-aesthetic properties that theories, construed as abstract entities, do actually possess, in virtue of which scientists make their aesthetic judgements.

There are, according to MAI, five classes of properties of theories that are relevant: symmetry, invocation of a model, visualizability/ abstractness, metaphysical allegiance and simplicity (related to unity). MAI stresses that many different properties fall under each of these headings. There are different kinds of symmetry; different theories have different kinds of models; some scientists, in some contexts, hold visualizability to be a virtue, while others, in other contexts, prize almost its opposite, namely abstractness; scientists have upheld different metaphysical views at different stages in the development of science, in terms of which they have sought to interpret scientific theories; and there are many different ways of assessing the simplicity of theories, yielding quite different results.

How, then, does the scientific community decide which of these very many different kinds of properties of theories are the relevant or important ones to employ in order to assess the acceptability of theories on non-empirical, or aesthetic, grounds? And what is the justification for so assessing theories, in terms of the preferred properties? How, in particular, can MAI do justice to the fact that aesthetic criteria in science change over time?

The answer is that, at any given stage, a scientific community prefers those new theories that have properties which earlier theories, which have proved to be empirically successful, also possess. If a certain kind of theory, with characteristic aesthetic properties, has met with empirical success in the past then, understandably enough, scientists are influenced to give preference to similar kinds of theories, with similar properties, in the future. This is "the aesthetic induction". At a stroke, the above three questions are answered.

In a little more detail, we can imagine that a scientific community can consider many different aesthetic properties of theories, P, Q, R, …. The community will assign a different weighting, W P , W Q , W R , … to each of these properties, each weighting determining how influential the corresponding property is in theory choice. The weightings are in turn determined by what kinds of theory, with what properties, have (or have not) met with empirical success in the past. W P , W Q , W R , … are, in other words, determined by the aesthetic induction.

According to MAI, then, two kinds of criteria are employed in science to choose theories. On the one hand there are criteria, listed above, arrived at by analysis of the basic aim of science of achieving empirical adequacy. And, on the other hand, there are criteria arrived at by the aesthetic induction. The second presupposes the first. Aesthetic criteria will tend to be conservative, based as they are on empirical performance of theories in the past. New theories, with the potential for great predictive success, may violate existing, conservative aesthetic criteria. When such a theory is developed, there is a rupture in accepted aesthetic criteria. Initially the new theory is judged to be "ugly"; but as its empirical potential becomes manifest, aesthetic criteria are changed to suit the new theory. This is what a scientific revolution amounts to, according to MAI, a conception somewhat different from Kuhn's. In terms of this conception, neither Copernicus's theory, nor Einstein's theory of special relativity, were revolutionary, because neither broke with aesthetic criteria of the past. But Kepler's laws of planetary motion, and quantum theory, were both revolutionary, in that these theories broke dramatically with aesthetic criteria generally accepted at the time.