

Only by looking at a series of theories, a given T 1 (the hard core) plus changing auxiliary hypotheses (the protective belt), and comparing this with a rival series based on a different hard core, T 2 , and comparing the extent to which the two series are empirically progressive or degenerating, can one assess the relative empirical merits of T 1 and T 2. For AOE, the situation is very different. A research programme in theoretical physics consists of a blueprint, B, and a succession of theories, T 1 , T 2 … T n (each equivalent to a Lakatosian hard core), which are successive attempts to capture B as a testable theory. If T 1 , T 2 … T n are increasingly empirically successful (in a roughly Popperian sense) and also increasingly successful at capturing B, then this means that B is empirically fruitful. A rival blueprint, B*, might be such that the series T 1 , T 2 … T n moves further and further away from B*: this would mean that B* is empirically sterile. A major part of the point of research programmes, for AOE, is to assess the relative empirical fruitfulness of rival metaphysical theses, at levels 3 and 4 (and above, if necessary). Though mostly untestable, nevertheless metaphysical theses can be assessed in a quasi-empirical way, in terms of the empirical progressiveness or degeneracy of the research programmes with which they are associated (or can be regarded as being associated). 37 This is, according to AOE, a key feature of scientific method, one which makes scientific progress possible. It makes it possible for improving theoretical knowledge to lead to a reassessment of what is the best available blueprint, which in turn leads to a reassessment of the best available non-empirical methodological rules, such as symmetry principles. In other words, it makes it possible for there to be positive feedback between improving knowledge and improving aims and methods (improving knowledge-about-how-to-improve-knowledge), a vital feature of scientific rationality according to AOE.

The differences indicated enable AOE to overcome problems which Lakatos's view cannot solve. Lakatos insists that there is no such thing as instant rationality: however apparently decisive the refutation of a theory may be, it is always possible to salvage it from refutation in a contentincreasing way by the invention of an appropriate auxiliary hypothesis. It is this consideration which leads Lakatos to argue that only series of theories, competing research programmes, can be assessed rationally, in terms of relative empirical progressiveness. But in practice in science there do seem to be instant refutations. A famous example is the refutation of parity. This is a symmetry which declares, roughly, that if a process can occur, then so can its mirror image. This was decisively refuted by, by means of an experiment which showed that electrons were emitted in a preferential direction from cobalt nuclei undergoing radioactive decay in a magnetic field. Parity conservation implied that this would not occur. Strictly speaking, it was not parity conservation on its own that was refuted, but parity plus quantum theory plus the theory of weak interactions plus the theory of nuclear structure plus a highly theoretical description of the experiment. One would think there was plenty of scope, here, for auxiliary hypotheses to be invented to salvage parity from refutation. No such hypothesis was forthcoming; the refutation of parity conservation was accepted immediately by the physics community, despite strong resistance to accepting such a conclusion (because of the implausibility of supposing that nature distinguishes between left-handedness and right-handedness at the level of fundamental physical theory). Allan Franklin, who has produced what is probably the best account of the downfall of parity conservation, has put the matter like this: "It is fair to say that as soon as any physicist saw the experimental result they were convinced that parity was not conserved in the weak interactions"Scientific practice seems almost to refute Lakatos's view.

But it does not refute AOE. According to Lakatos, in the end only empirical considerations, plus considerations of empirical content, restrict choice of theory; few restrictions are placed on how a body of theory may be modified to salvage it from refutation. AOE places much more severe restrictions on choice of theory. In addition to those that it has in common with Lakatos's view, AOE demands of a fundamental physical theory that it, together with other such theories, exemplifies physicalism, to a sufficient degree. This makes it very much more difficult to modify a body of theory so as to salvage it from refutation. Instant refutation is not surprising, granted AOE.Lakatos's view requires that science consists of competing research programmes. Unquestionably, the history of science reveals that competing research programmes have, on occasions existed. But it is not clear that all science has this character, as Lakatos's view would seem to require. After Heisenberg and Schrödinger had developed quantum theory in the mid 1920s, there continued to be debate about how the new theory should be interpreted, and whether the new theory, interpreted along the orthodox lines advocated by Bohr, Heisenberg and others, was ultimately acceptable. But there was nothing like a competing research programme. Viewed from the perspective of AOE, all this makes perfect sense. There were indeed serious grounds for regarding the new theory as unsatisfactory (see Chapter 3; see also