. By contrast, AOE solves the problems of explaining what the simplicity or unity of a theory is without difficulty, as we shall see in Chapter 4. Put very briefly, in order to be unified, a physical theory must be such that its content, what it asserts about the world, must be the same throughout all the phenomena to which the theory applies. If the content of a physical theory, T, splits into N distinct regions, so that the content of any one region is different from what it is in all the others, then T is disunified to degree N. For perfect unity we require N = 1. Because what matters is content, not form, the way T is formulated is irrelevant to this way of assessing simplicity or unity. Falsificationism cannot avail itself of this way of assessing unity because to do so makes it abundantly clear that acceptance of unified theories only, in this sense of "unified", when endlessly many empirically more successful disunified rivals are available, involves making a persistent metaphysical assumption about the nature of the universe. Within AOE, there is a second way in which the unity of T may be assessed: in terms of the extent to which the content of T exemplifies the best available level 3 metaphysical blueprint. This second conception of simplicity or unity evolves with the evolution of level 3 ideas. As we improve our ideas about how the universe is unified, with the advance of knowledge in theoretical physics, so non-empirical methods for selecting theories on the basis of simplicity or unity improve as well. Thus current symmetry principles of modern physics, such as Lorentz invariance and gauge invariance, which guide acceptance of theory, are an advance over simplicity criteria upheld by Newton.Ultimately, as we shall see in Chapter 4, requirements of theoretical unity, as these apply in physics, need to be applied to the totality of fundamental physical theory in physics, and not to individual theories.

5. Scientific method. Dressed falsificationism acknowledges (correctly) that two considerations govern selection of theory in science, namely considerations that have to do with (a) evidence, and (b) simplicity. But because it cannot solve the problem of what simplicity is, dressed falsificationism cannot, with any precision, specify what methods are involved when theories are selected on the basis of simplicity. Nor can the view do justice to the way in which the methods of physics evolve with evolving knowledge, especially methods that assert that acceptable theories must satisfy this or that symmetry. In other words, falsificationism fails to solve what may be called the "methodological" problem of induction: the problem of specifying, merely, what the methods are that are employed by science in accepting and rejecting theories (leaving aside the further problem of justifying these methods given that the aim is to acquire knowledge). AOE, by contrast, solves the problem of simplicity, and thus can specify precisely what methods are involved when theories are selected on the basis of simplicity or unity. Furthermore, AOE can do justice to evolving criteria of simplicity (as we have just seen), and hence evolving methods. According to AOE, the totality of fundamental physical theory, T, can be assessed (i) by considering the extent to which its content is unified, and thus exemplifies the fixed level 4 thesis of physicalism, or (ii) by considering the extent to which its content exemplifies the evolving, best available level 3 thesis. Whereas (i) constitutes a fixed criterion of unity (as long as physicalism is not modified), (ii) constitutes an evolving criterion, a criterion of unity that improves with improving knowledge.

6. Evolving aims and methods. A point, briefly alluded to in 4 and 5 above, deserves further emphasis. As physics has evolved, from Newton's time to today, non-empirical methods, determining what theories will be accepted and rejected, have evolved as well. Newton, in his Principia, formulated four rules of reasoning, three of which are concerned with simplicity. Principles that have been proposed since include: invariance with respect to position, orientation, time, uniform velocity, charge conjugation, parity and time-reversal; principles of conservation of mass, momentum, angular momentum, energy and charge; Lorentz invariance; Mach's principle; the principle of equivalence; principles of gauge invariance, global and local; supersymmetry; duality principles; the principle that different kinds of particle should be reduced to one kind, and different kinds of force should be reduced to one kind; and the principle that space-time on the one hand, and particles and forces on the other, should be unified. All of these principles can be interpreted as methodological rules which specify requirements theories must meet in order to be accepted. They can also be interpreted as physical principles, making substantial assertions about such things as space, time, matter and force. Some, such as conservation of mass, parity and charge conjugation, have been shown to be false; others, such as Mach's principle, have never been generally accepted; still others, such as supersymmetry, remain speculative.