Popper might have tried to wriggle out of accepting this conclusion by pointing to the fact that he only declared that a new theory, in order to be acceptable, "should" proceed from some simple, unifying idea. It is desirable, but not essential, that new theories should satisfy this principle. The principle is relevant to the context of discovery, perhaps, but not to the context of acceptance and rejection. (It is a heuristic principle, not a methodological one.) But if Popper's doctrine is interpreted in this way, it immediately fails to overcome the objections spelled out in section 2.3 above. Either falsificationism adopts Popper's principle of simplicity as a methodological principle, or it does not. If it does, it encounters the objections just indicated; if it does not, it encounters the objections of section 2.3.

2.5 From falsificationism to aim-oriented empiricism

The conclusion to be drawn from the argument of the last two sections is that science is more rational, more intellectually rigorous, if it makes explicit, as a criticizable tenet of (conjectural) scientific knowledge, that substantial, influential and problematic metaphysical thesis which is implicit in the way physics persistently rejects ad hoc theories, however empirically successful they may be.At once two important new problems leap to our attention. What, precisely, does this metaphysical thesis assert? And on what grounds is it to be (conjecturally) accepted as a part of scientific knowledge?

As far as the first of the above two problems is concerned, a wide range of metaphysical theses are available. As I indicated in section 2.3 above, ad hoc theories range from the utterly crackpot and silly, to theories that are only somewhat lacking in simplicity or unity. At one extreme, we might adopt a metaphysical thesis that excludes only utterly silly theories; at the other extreme, we might adopt the thesis that the universe is physically comprehensible in the sense that it has a unified dynamic structure, some yet-to-be-discovered unified physical "theory of everything" being true-a thesis that I shall call "physicalism". We might even adopt some specific version of physicalism, which asserts that the underlying physical unity is of a specific type: it is made up of a unified field perhaps, or a quantum field, or empty topologically complex curved space-time, or a quantum string field. Other things being equal, the more specific the thesis (and thus the more it excludes) so the more likely it is to be false, whereas the more unspecific it is so the more likely it is to be true. It is not, it seems, at all clear what metaphysical thesis we should take science to be presupposing.

As far as the second of the above two problems is concerned, it could be argued that grounds for accepting the metaphysical conjecture of physics (whatever precisely it may be) come from the fact that physics inevitably accepts this conjecture in persistently accepting unified theories in preference to empirically more successful disunified rivals, and it is more rigorous to acknowledge the conjecture than to disavow it. No more is required to render acceptance of the conjecture rational. But this is hardly satisfactory. It would always be possible to formulate an aberrant version of the metaphysical conjecture-a version which asserts that the universe exhibits lawful unity until the year 2090, let us say, when quite different physical laws will begin to operate. If this conjecture is accepted, physical theories would be accepted which would be quite different from the ones we do accept, but nevertheless just as empirically successful (until 2090 at least). There does need to be some reason for accepting the unified metaphysical conjecture we do implicitly accept, in preference to aberrant versions of this conjecture-a reason more substantial than "this conjecture is implicit in what theoretical physicists actually do".

We cannot hope to provide an argument that establishes that the unified metaphysical conjecture of physics is true, or probably true. Any such argument that ignores experience and is entirely a priori is surely entirely impossible. What could the premises of such an argument be? On the other hand, any such argument that appeals to experience, to empirical science, also seems impossible. Any attempt to establish the truth of the metaphysical conjecture of lawful unity by an appeal to the success of science can always be rebutted by the counter-claim that the aberrant version of the metaphysical conjecture (which postulates radical change in 2090) would receive just as much support from an empirically equally successful aberrant science.

There does not seem to be much hope either for a Kantian argument along the lines that experience cannot refute order in the universe because experience, in order to be conscious, must exhibit some order. We can easily imagine a universe that is sufficiently orderly for conscious experience, and life, to be possible, but in which only disunified, aberrant laws, of one kind or another, hold. Arguments along Kantian lines do not provide grounds for accepting a metaphysical conjecture sufficiently contentful to exclude empirically successful aberrant physical theories.

One possibility is to argue that it is rational to accept a metaphysical conjecture which is such that the truth of the conjecture is required for the pursuit of knowledge to be possible at all. Even though there would be no argument for the truth of the thesis, there would be an argument for accepting the thesis as a part of knowledge since, if the thesis is false, we cannot acquire knowledge whatever we assume. Accepting the thesis as a part of scientific knowledge cannot imperil or adversely affect science whatever the universe is like.