Let us call this assumption of unity U; and let us call the view, just outlined, that in persistently only accepting unifying theories science presupposes U, "presuppositionism".

Most current views about science deny that science makes a substantial, persistent assumption about the universe. This is true, for example, of logical positivism, inductivism, logical empiricism, hypothetico-deductivism, conventionalism, constructive empiricism, pragmatism, realism, induction-to-the-best-explanationism, and the views of Popper,It is true, too, of more recent work on the methods and metaphysics of science.All these views, diverse as they are in other respects, accept a thesis which may be called standard empiricism (SE): in science, theories are accepted on the basis of empirical success and failure, and on the basis of simplicity, unity or explanatoriness, but no substantial thesis about the world is accepted permanently by science, as a part of scientific knowledge, independently of empirical considerations. It deserves to be noted that even Feyerabend, and even social constructivist and relativist sociologists and historians of science, uphold SE as the best available ideal of scientific rationality. If science can be exhibited as rational, they hold (in effect), then this must be done in a way that is compatible with SE. The failure of science to live up to the rational ideal of SE is taken by them to demonstrate that science is not rational. That it is so taken demonstrates convincingly that they hold SE to be the only possible rational ideal for science (an ideal which cannot, it so happens, in their view, be met).

Presuppositionism is of course incompatible with SE, and thus incompatible will all the above doctrines. One crucial point needs to be noted about the argument so far: presuppositionism is more rigorous than all the above versions of SE entirely independent of any justification of U, or justification for accepting U as a part of scientific knowledge (that is in addition to the one given above). In saying this I am appealing to the following wholly uncontroversial requirement for rigour.

(R) In order to be rigorous, it is necessary that assumptions that are substantial, influential and problematic be made explicit-so that they can be criticized, so that alternatives may be developed and assessed (see

All versions of SE fail to satisfy (R) in just the way in which presuppositionism does satisfy (R). Presuppositionism makes the assumption U explicit (and so criticizable and, we may hope, improvable), while all versions of SE deny that science does make any such assumption as U. Thus presuppositonism is more rigorous than all versions of SE even in the absence of any kind of justification of U. Indeed, it is precisely because the version of U that is implicitly accepted by physics at any stage in its development is a pure conjecture, bereft of justification, almost bound to be false, that it needs to be acknowledged, made explicit within physics, so that it can be critically assessed and, we may hope, improved. In short, quite independent of any claim to solve the problem of induction, presuppositionism is more rigorous, and thus more acceptable, than any of the above versions of SE. This has a major implication for all attempts at solving the problem of induction: no such attempt can succeed if any version of SE is presupposed, since these all lack rigour. Attempts at solving the problem of induction must at least begin with presuppositionism, unless a better view of science emerges.

Far from presupposing the uniformity or unity of nature being a mug's game, it is the other way round: attempting to construe science in such a way that science does not presuppose the uniformity or unity of nature is the mug's game, since all such views of science fail to satisfy elementary requirements for rigour, namely (R), and thus cannot provide a basis for solving the problem of induction that can hope to succeed. Presuppositionism is the only non-mug's game in town unless, as I have said, something better turns up.

Presuppositionism is, however, as it stands, untenable. This is because it is not at all clear what the assumption U is, or ought to be. It is vital to appreciate that there are endlessly many different assumptions of unity which science may be construed to make, almost all of which are false (since they contradict each other). Even more urgent than any problem of justification, there is the following problem: How can the assumption of unity being made by science at present, which is implicit in current scientific views as to what counts as theoretical unity, and almost bound to be false, be improved?

What is at issue is not the traditional philosophical problem of justification (which presupposes that U is true), but rather the scientific (and quasi-Popperian) one of improving what is almost bound to be false.In surveying the different possible ways in which the universe may be unified, one important point to appreciate is that there is no single, sharp distinction between unity and disunity or aberrance. By "unity" we could mean merely that physical laws are the same throughout space and time. Or we could mean, in addition, that physical laws remain the same as other variables change, such as velocity, temperature, or mass (so that, for example, Newton's inverse square law of gravitation does not abruptly become an inverse cube law as masses of 1,000 tons are reached). Or, more restrictively still, we could mean (in addition) that there is only one force in nature, and not three or four distinct forces (such as gravitation, the electromagnetic force, and the weak and strong forces of nuclear physics). More restrictively still, we could mean that there is just one kind of particle in existence, or one kind of physical entity, a self-interacting field spread throughout space and time. Finally, and even more restrictively, we could mean that space, time, matter and force are all unified into one, unified, self-interacting entity.