

We might view the matter as follows. (1) Standard empiricists, like Hempel and Popper, reject the existence of permanent metaphysical presuppositions inherent in science. (Even Kuhn and Lakatos only allow for temporary metaphysical presuppositions to be assessed ultimately in terms of the empirical success of the specialist research they support; thus Kuhn and Lakatos ultimately also advocate standard empiricism.) This is dishonest, as the insolubility of the problem of induction indicates. (2) Metaphysical presuppositionists, like Russell, Koyré, Burtt and Buchdahl, do acknowledge the existence of long-term, comprehensive metaphysical presuppositions implicit in science. This is more honest. These writers fail, however, to emphasize the crucial importance of articulating and critically developing such presuppositions as an integral part of science. In addition, these writers fail to acknowledge the existence of valuepresuppositions implicit in science. This is dishonest. (3) Easlea, Schumacher and others do acknowledge the existence of such value-presuppositions implicit in science. This is more honest still. These writers fail, however, to emphasize the crucial importance of articulating and critically developing such presuppositions as an integral part of intellectual inquiry-thus failing to advocate a rational, critical fundamentalist version of the philosophy of wisdom. In addition, merely to acknowledge that value-presuppositions are implicit in intellectual inquiry is to fail to acknowledge that intellectual inquiry is itself a part of personal, social life, a kind of personal, social action, pursued in order to realize personal, social goals. This is dishonest. (4) Radical Marxists go further, in that they do conceive of, and pursue, intellectual inquiry as an aspect of personal, social action, designed to help achieve personal, social objectives. According to these writers, in capitalist societies intellectual inquiry is devoted primarily to helping to attain the objectives of capitalism: in their intellectual work these writers seek to act in such a way as to help overthrow capitalism, thus creating a socialist society and a socialist intellectual inquiry devoted to helping to realize socialist goals. In so far as these writers see and pursue intellectual inquiry as an aspect of life, social reality, social action, their vision and practice is even more honest still. These writers fail, however, to acknowledge the crucial importance of articulating and critically developing basic socialist presuppositions and objectives. They fail to confront obvious major problems inherent in the idea of a socialist society-such as the problem of centralized, bureaucratic power. This is dangerously dishonest. In particular, as a result of this failing, these writers fail to emphasize the fundamental importance of seeking to develop ways of life, institutions, societies, which progressively develop the aims and methods of personal, institutional and social life-thus enhancing our capacity to achieve that which is of value in life. These writers presuppose answers to problems (3) and (4), instead of seeking to develop a fundamentalist, rational society which enables us to discover improved answers to these problems, as we live.

In short, despite their diversity, the four positions just outlined have one crucial failing in common: they all fail to emphasize that rational action involves quite essentially seeking to improve our aims and methods as we act-the key tenet of aim-oriented rationality (see. 41. For a fascinating account of such a hunting and gathering tribal life, see) especially clearly and convincingly on this point, in part from personal experience. 43. A humane, cooperative, mutually understanding, pluralistic society presupposes and is, in a sense, presupposed by, universalism. If two people, two societies or two cultures, giving different answers to our four fundamental problems, are to act humanely and cooperatively together, there must be mutual understanding; this requires that each is able to imagine, at least as a possibility, that the other's answers are correct (or at least an improvement, in certain respects, over his own). This in turn requires that each recognizes the genuineness of the four fundamental problems. If each is to learn from the other, then each must acknowledge the genuineness of the four fundamental problems. On the other hand, to recognize that these problems are genuine is to imagine at least the possibility of answers different from one's own being given-which is to imagine a pluralistic society, at least as a possibility. Only universalism can do justice to the Socratic and Kantian idea that Reason forms a basis for the unity of mankind. 44. "Reason, like language, can be said to be a product of social life". See also the discussion of the claim that science is necessarily social in character, "Robinson Crusoe science", however successful, being necessarily only "revealed science" in that it must lack objectivity, pluralistic criticism (ibid., pp.. Unfortunately, Popper in his later work fails lamentably to develop these anticipations of the point stressed in this chapter (see, for example, note 40), that reason, epistemology, thought, intellectual inquiry, all need to be conceived of, and developed, as personal and social in character, in the world, a part of life. If we adopt the view advocated in section 9.7 that the aim of intellectual inquiry is to help us achieve wisdom, life of value, then the fundamental aim of intellectual inquiry becomes a personal, social aim, and the problems of intellectual inquiry become, fundamentally, personal, social problems of living. Our central task, in pursuing intellectual inquiry, becomes to help develop more rational, wiser ways of living, institutions, social orders. The split between personal, social aims and intellectual aims-the split between personal, social action and thought-disappears. Popper, however, holds that the basic aim of intellectual inquiry is to develop impersonal, objective knowledge. This leads him to develop his "world 3" theory of the intellectual domain. As a result, and quite disastrously, the fundamental personal and social problems of intellectual inquiry-problems we encounter in helping to develop life of value, a wiser world-are transformed into the pseudo metaphysical-neurological problems of how "world 3" can interact with the mind and the brain (see