with the Soviet Union, a testimony to the fact that the border is actually more of a frontier area than a line (see Billé, this volume). However, it should be noted that Mardai was far less accessible to Mongols at the time than the Soviet Union itself: whereas Mongolian students would go to universities in Ulan-Ude, Moscow or Saint-Petersburg, not even a [Mongolian?] bird could fly over Mardai, although it was located on Mongolian ground. Mardai was not so much a proxy for the Russian border as a super-border, a territory of exception, to which access was not regulated according to the usual rules. This, perhaps, contributed in making Mardai even more awe-inspiring than the Soviet Union itself: Mardai is remembered as Socialism itself in a condensed form,  closer to Mongolia than the Soviet Union ever was, and yet more closed to the Mongolian population than the Soviet Union actually was.

Memories of Mardai-"it has become like Chechnya"

Strong feelings of nostalgia, however, are still felt today by the Russian people  who used to live there, some of them for over fifteen years, and who had to leave almost overnight. It was reported that Russian inhabitants were very reluctant to leave the city: Tögsöö assumed that they were easy prey to the Russian Mafiaa back in their hometowns. Coming back after fifteen years of comfortable salary abroad, they were not only deemed rich, they were also quite vulnerable. The Internet, through such media as picture sharing and mapping software (like Google Earth and Panoramio), provides us with testimonies from former inhabitants, who post pictures and comment on each other's recollections. Pictures of the central square, of the social club, and of the school, have been commented on with great emotion by This impression is shared by former Russian residents themselves, as conveyed on the web page quoted earlier, which concludes its description of Mardai in the following way "ll in all, it was the village of Socialism as it should actually be, where everyone had what they needed, and everyone was happy.. http://www.maxpey.narod.ru/mongol.

html, translated from Russian by S. Batchimeg). Russiann, here, includes "uryats from the "uryat "utonomous Soviet Socialist

Republic. As was already mentioned, these were clearly separated from the local Buryat population, as they enjoyed different status in Mardai and often spoke only Russian. When Mongols-whether Buryat or Halh-speak about the Russian population of Mardai, they usually do not distinguish between Buryat and other Soviet nationals.

former residents evoking their years spent as children or workers in the town

Ramonn My beloved school!-Ser. Terexov: As for me I have spent the most refined moments under the building of this school. I'd like to exchange photos of this village and its surroundings. My address isElena: The best school ever. How it hurts to see what remains, I wish everything could be there again So sad.... 

This nostalgia might also turn into deep sorrow when former residents come back to the town and realise what it has become. Tögsöö told me the story of a Buryat foreman who shed tears when he returned to visit only one year after he left, in the autumn of. Tögsöö was there, and he remembers the old man lamenting it has become like Chechnya! as if the city had been destroyed by

But it illustrates also that the destruction of Mardai was felt as as a violent act by former Russian and even Buryat residents-something comparable to an act of war. Interestingly, the image of a war zonee is also conjured up by a (presumably) Canadian visitor, who describes on a picture sharing website (http://www.pbase.com/buznsarah/mardai) how depressed he or she felt upon seeing the city in such a distastefull statee Unlike a war zone where the destruction takes place through external forces, here it has been internal forces. One can only be surprised with this confident assertion that Mardai was actually internall to Mongolia, and this description actually raises several angry comments from (presumably) Mongolian users. Yet, this impression shares with that of the foreman a comparable bewilderment: how could such a large and modern town be demolished so thoroughly? What kind of violence-and directed to whom-does this act of destruction entail? Certainly, the violent character of bringing down a whole town, unanimously considered a jewel of European modernity, occurred to the local population as well. During my trip, people appeared visibly embarrassed when they recalled such episodes as the one involving the Buryat foreman. I heard a number of discussions regarding the possibility that Russians might come back to restart the mine, and possibly even rebuild the city. The main idea that came out of these discussions was that Russians should be very upset to see their beautiful city brought down to ruins. People assumed they would be reluctant to build it again from scratch.

However, there was notoriously no attempt among the local population to deflect responsibility for this upon other people, and to blame some irresponsible and shameless profit seekers for its destruction. In addition, there was clearly no aggression associated with the dismantling of the city, no suggestion that the destruction of Mardai was an act of revenge wreaked by Mongolian people onto Russians for their exclusion from the city, and no sign whatsoever that scrapping was associated with any kind of violence. We have seen how Tögsöö himself, who took an active part in the ruination of the city, cultivated the memory of its previous state. It seems that the stripping of the iron, Mardai's ruination, was not aimed at erasing the past, at re-conquering Mongolian space. In other words, it would be a mistake to understand Mardai's ruination as an attempt at obliteration.