

These local Russian circumstances were repeatedly strengthened through their juxtaposition with the potent global syndrome of Yellow Perill. The modern period gave rise to a phenomenon of great xenophobiaaa great both in terms of its global character and of its regulating impact on the behaviour and in terms of the number of people involved. I share Lev Gudkov's opinion regarding the emergence of mass phobias, namely that the emergence and development of symbolic enemies are becoming models of particular reactions to processes of mass creation, initiated by modernising transformations in traditional societies. The enemy becomes an essential tool of consolidation of a fundamentally new social form-a poorly-managed plasma of mass resentment and indignation…… ibid..

as a result of the destruction of social order. "t the turn of the twentieth century, the Yellow Perill syndrome emerged as a global phenomenon and gained its appellation (see, for instance, Schimmelpenninck van der Oye. In the United States, its formation was motivated by concurrent factors. A massive influx of Chinese workforce provoked strong anti-immigrant sentiments, a wave of commonplace racial hatred and violence. These sentiments were amplified and shaped by a well-developed mass culture. The syndrome became part of an ideological and political process embedded in mass culture (comics, films, criminal and fantasy novels). A powerful trend formed within mass culture-from the caricatured hero of the Yellow Kid to the image, which survived throughout the twentieth century, of the sinister Dr Fu Manchuu, a character in a series of detective novels and several films.Dr Fu Manchu was a mystical Oriental, cunning and crafty, who possessed both incredible intellect and vast erudition; having received a European education, this made him especially terrible. He was an absolute villain, intent on destroying European peace. He was a creature rather than a man, but an individualised creature, a colourful and unique personality.

In Germany, the syndrome evolved without common and recurrent contact with Chinese immigrants or China. It formed part of a geopolitical

doctrine, based on ideas of statehood and racial and civilisational categories, together with a global perception of a war of the worlds. Emperor

Wilhelm II actively and intensively developed and disseminated the geopolitically-constructed syndrome of the Yellow Perill Perepiska-,-Wilhelm II-. Planned and commissioned by him, a drawing was created in where a group of women, portraying the main European nations, look in horror at the terrifying figure of a Buddha rising in the East, while an angel, standing on a mountain top, points at the figure with a sword in his hand. The drawing was accompanied by the following legend Peoples of Europe, protect your most precious wealthh. The drawing was presented to Nicholas II with a notee I beseech you to kindly accept this drawing sketched by me, representing the symbolic figures of Russia and Germany standing guard on the bank of the Yellow Sea to preach the Gospel, the truth and the light in the East Remnev .

In Russia, the modes of stereotyping in the USA and Germany merged together, and were reinforced by a distinct sense of insecurity in the Russian Far East. This distant outlying region-barely assimilated into the rest of the country, and isolated from the metropolitan area-was on the edge of a giant China, which had the potential to invade. China was still asleep, and was perceived as a territory rather than as a bearer of sovereign power. However, it was potentially strong on account of its large population and its nationalistic tradition. The Russians wondered: what will happen if the sleeping giant awakes? The notion of a yelloww expansionist Japan emerged following the Russo-Japanese war. The frightening consequences of a unification of China and Japan on the basis of race and the prospect of their joint yellow expansionn were actively debated. These ideas clashed when tens of thousands of (mostly temporary and seasonal) Chinese migrant workers arrived, without whom the economic life, development and protection of the Russian Far East were impossible.

An important part of Russian tradition was the attitude towards the Chinese as an undifferentiated mass into which individuality dissolved. Epithets such as crowd, ants, locusts or midges were used to describe the Chinese. The description of the Chinese painted by the political writer A. Verezhnikov in Sovremennik is filled with depersonalising imagery:

A Chinese crowd in blue rags, with the same beardless, yellow faces, wandering as far as the eye can see. It does not plot, argue, nor contradict… speaking with the same sibilant, squeaking voice… In this crowd there is no leader, no ring-leader, no individual standing out from the rest… No proud, bold, daring voices…. Every figure in a Chinese crowd moulded the same as the rest, like factory items… "ut in this indifference, half-sleep and somnolence one can detect an enduring patience for the right moment, a concealed suspicion. And it looks as if they are just about to start stirring all at once, that they will start moving their slanted eyes, rise and go. And they will go… dozens turning into hundreds, hundreds into thousands… and they will keep going, breeding and multiplying Verezhnikov-.