Whereas in the correlation of separateness and unity, the bridge always allows the accent to fall on the latter, the door represents in a more decisive manner how separating and connecting are only two sides of the same act .

Yet, although the door might offer both possibilities simultaneously to intellectual contemplation, its openn and closed modes never occur at the same time in practice. This stands in sharp contrast with borders: while a door is either open or closed, a border is always both at the same time-it is closed to certain people and things, while remaining open to others. In this respect, borders are more akin to Gaston's door than to ordinary ones. Following Gaston's intervention, as we saw earlier, the door became permanently open to animals, while remaining closed to draughts: the door's new conformation transformed it into a discriminating device of passage, which is what, fundamentally, international borders are meant to be. Borders look different depending on who you are, and crucially, where you come from: while to some migrants they are a mere administrative formality (a procedure only slightly more time-consuming than depressing a door handle), to others they will never be anything else than fortress walls, the crossing of which is made at the risk of one's life. This contrast is particularly striking in the case of European borders (see the contributions to the volume edited by Dijstelbloem and Meijer in 2011), but it is also true of others Leanne Weber , drawing on Daniele Joly, has aptly compared the border to a porous dam, expected to allow a steady and lucrative flow of welcome visitors, while holding back the floods of unwanted Others.Borders, however, not only discriminate between different kinds of people, they also impose certain conditions to their crossing: borders are not open to everybody, and not to everybody on the same conditions. Some nationals will need specific authorisations, in the form of visas, or even specific forms of monitoring (such as the biometric database established for asylum seekers, van der Ploeg and Sprenkels 2011), while others will only need their passport, or even their national ID. Meanwhile, borders are not open to any commodity under any circumstances: the particular goods, as well as their quantities, that an individual can take across the border is often subject to limitations, and such limitations, of course, do not apply in the same way to imports on a national scale.

The particular conditions set to border crossing for individuals and goods vary from one country, even from one border, to the other. Therefore, rather than the opposition between a closed and an openn mode, like ordinary doors, what characterises a border is a specific regime of openness-i.e. a set of conditions under which it is open to certain people and to certain things, while closed to others. The modulation of this regime according to economic needs, anxieties about migration, and international political agendas, is of crucial importance in a state's governmentality, as shown by Michel Foucault in his famous lecture series on Security, Territory, Populationn. With the advent of mercantilism in the eighteenth century, the problem of populationnits management and its discipline-became a central concern (the central concern) for the sovereign. However, Foucault continues,

The population can only be the basis of the state's wealth and power in this way on condition, of course, that it is framed by a regulatory apparatus (appareil) that prevents emigration, calls for immigrants, and promotes the birth rate, a regulatory apparatus that also defines useful and exportable products

Borders, as the main device of migration control, cannot but have a central role in this regulatory apparatus. Of course, the situation has changed since the eighteenth century, and the concern now, at least in Euro-American countries, is not so much to prevent emigration than to control immigration.

European Union, take the border as a stage where image management, rather than the actual deterring of illegal crossings, is at stakee What makes the border a particularly challenging stage is that the actors are involved in a double performance, having to assure some of the audience that the border is being opened (to legal flows) while reassuring the rest of the audience that the border is being sufficiently closed (to illegal flows .

Yet, the border has kept its role as part of the regulatory apparatus by which a sovereign state seeks to ensure security and manage its population, through an efficient administration of its territory. This is also true of North

Asian regions: the data presented in appendix A shows that Russia produces a huge amount of statistics (one of the main tools in the art of governement, says Foucault, concerning borders, in order to evaluate the way these perform as a device that fosters economic exchanges while regulating migration.

In this respect, contrary to doors, and against a widespread rhetoric in Europe and "nglo-"merican countries, there is no such thing as a closed border: there are only varying degrees of openness. Indeed, it would be unheard of for a state to choose to close its borders to all incoming migrants; would it decide to do so, it would probably not wish to close its boundaries to the circulation of its own population-even North Korea, to a certain extent, receives some visitors, and sends some of its population abroad.  Closing borders downn is thus a political fiction, which really means an increasingly discriminatory migration policy-a particularly restricted regime of openness. In other words, the border is never closed, it might just be open to a smaller proportion of migrants-to those who are chosenn, as well as to deserving refugees.  Closed border policies are nothing but a smoke-screen for a dryly utilitarian migration policy taking economic efficiency, centrally and unilaterally engineered, as the only possible justification for incoming migration. Moreover, rather than closing the border this kind of policy only makes it more difficult, and more dangerous, for refugees to cross it Fassin Weber , for it is a well known fact that candidates for migration will always find ways to circumvent the official programme of a border that restricts their access.