

Largely, in social science literature, borders have become a vantage point to critique nation-state. "orders and borderlands are sites and symbols of power Donnan and Wilson. The US-Mexico borders and the Israeli-Palestine borders are characterised as emblematic wild zones of power where the state authority exercises extralegal violence to defend them Morris-Suzuki. "s such, borders are seen as what define a nation-state, which is largely represented as a gigantic prison with wired fences, preventing free movement of goods and people. Empires, once denounced and overthrown, have now struck back; they are re-imagined as a cosmopolitan space without borders, imbued with hospitality, welcoming and hosting strangers. Deleuze and Guattariis nomadology reigns over the post-national global imagery: nation-states are sedentary and bound whereas empires are nomadic and open Malkki .

This pro-empire theoretical movement in the West mirrors debates on borders and walls in modern China. In the early s at the height of the ideological tensions with the Soviet Union, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) openly defended Chinggis Khan and the Mongol Empire, celebrating them for sweeping away all the petty kingdoms lying between China and Europe, thereby spreading Chinese civilisation to Europe, including Russia (Farquhar 񮽙񮽙񮽙񮽙񮽙. Pax Mongolica was appropriated as pax Sinica. During the liberalist movement leading up to the Tian'anmen protests in June , many Chinese intellectuals denounced the Great Wall, not only for its ineffectiveness in defending China from repeated nomadic invasions, but more importantly for its historical role in creating a closed frame of mind in the Chinese people while what they longed for was the blue ocean, where they could sail toward freedom. Heshang (Deathsong of the River), a six-part television documentary series made in , celebrated as a Chinese version of The Closing of the American Mind, and one which led to political radicalism, has the following to say about the Great Wall:

"y the time that Genghis Khanns [[[fierce horsemen had swept down like a tide, not even natural barriers like the Yellow River and the Yangtze, let alone the Great Wall, could stop them Su and Wang .

In direct contrast to the now-forgotten Great Wall of the Qin, the Great Wall of the Ming which retreated a thousand li backwards, has been the object of incomparable reverence. People pride themselves on the fact that it is the only feat of human engineering visible to astronauts on the moon. People even wish to use it as a symbol of China's strength. And yet, if the Great Wall could speak, it would very frankly tell us, its Chinese [huaxia] grandchildren, that it is a great and tragic gravestone forged by historical destiny. It can by no means represent strength, initiative, and glory; it can only represent an isolationist, conservative and incompetent defence and a cowardly lack of aggression. Because of its great size and long history, it has deeply imprinted its arrogance and self-delusion in the souls of our people. Alas, O Great Wall, why do we still want to praise you?Here, the Great Wall was imagined as the Berlin Wall, a symbol of closed mind and cowardice. Today, leading Chinese writers such as Yu Qiuyu laud the Kangxi Emperor of the Qing dynasty for his decision not to repair the Great Wall when he received a report from Cai Yuan, the governor of Gubeikou Pass in May about the derelict state of the Wall.

In numerous contemporary Chinese writings, the following from Kangxi's reply is quoted to prove that the Qing was an open Empiree

Emperors and kings had their own ways to rule all under heaven; they did not simply rely on perilous nature. "fter the Qin built the Great Wall, the Han, Tang, and Song dynasties often repaired it, but had they ever been free from border troubles? "t the end of the Ming, my grandfatherled his great army, riding straight in, defeating allarmies nobody could stop him. It is obvious that the way to defend a state is really to promote good morality and let people live in peace. If people obey happily, then the state is legitimate and the border will be solid automatically… In the past the Qin launched a large scale project to build the Great Wall. Our dynasty bestows favour to the Khalkha, allowing them to defend the North [against the Russians]] this is more solid than the Great Wall Qingdai Guanxiu ch.

It is fascinating that contemporary Chinese scholars have taken the perspective of their former conquerors who ipso facto would not need a Great Wall to block themselves from conquering China. In their political romanticism, 񮽙 Chinese intellectuals have turned the Manchu conquerors into staunch enemies of smallness, the best practitioners of da-yi-tong, the highest Chinese political ideal of grand unity. " Li Zhiting romanced the following See Schmitts discussion of political romanticism In the romantic it is not reality that matters, but rather romantic productivity, which transforms everything and makes it into the occasion for poetry. What the king and queen are in reality is intentionally ignored. Their function consists instead in being a point of departure for romantic feelings. The same holds for the beloved. From the standpoint of romanticism, therefore, it is simply not possible to distinguish between the king, the state, or the beloved. In the twilight of the emotions, they blend into one another .