The duties of the prostitutes are to bring the pimp consequent benefits, to be hard-working and to adopt correct behaviour, which means to avoid becoming involved in scandals, drawing public attention to themselves or being drunk. Transgression of these rules results in penalties or, with stricter pimps, in beatings with a billiard cue. A wide credit system allows the pimps to tie down prostitutes and restrict their movement. Available data testify to the absence of forced prostitution in Ereen and the National AIDS Foundation Review mentions that women who work as prostitutes in Ereen mainly come of their own free will. Nevertheless, the Ereen city brothels' indebting process of voluntary prostitution appears to provide a gateway to sexual slavery. In addition, Mongolian women forced into prostitution have to pass through Ereen on their way to the south of China.

Daily life in an Ereen brothel

I spent twenty days and nights with twelve women who work at ger No.. These women felt they were lucky on account of their pimp's kindness. They called him aav daddy, while pimps are usually called ah elder brother, uncleee in the other gers of Jin Cho. In each ger, prostitutes rank in a hierarchy depending on their age, education, seniority, look, behaviour, etc. Nevertheless, they constitute a close-knit community that lives together and shares duties, a private room and bed, some clothes and make-up, money and guarantees, clients, information, as well as mobile phones, condoms and food. I never saw anyone eating a takeaway meal alonee at around pm, one by one, women ordered a meal from one of the restaurants located on Jin Cho and always shared their food with someone. This commensality alludes to a consubstantiation process linking together the prostitutes of the same ger. The very character of the women who prostitute themselves completely dissolves into the community associated with the place of prostitutionn they are enmeshed in a community of destiny Mathieu. It looks as if they share a common body, the prostitute's body, constructed as a sexual object.

The individual personalities of the prostitutes are erased by their personaa such transformation underlines the light of the atmosphere of the housee Pan. This character of the prostitute, individually and collectively acted out by all the women living together in the common scene of the ger, induces a kind of dissociation process inside each of them. In their daily life, women appear to be enacting a role, as if they are playing a character in a play. For four to six hours every afternoon, all the women prepare their body in order to intensify their power of seduction. They require several hours to seek the character that best fits their personality and particular mood.  This role acting is reinforced by the fact that Mongolian women use a pseudonym with their customers. 20 They become someone else through a kind of metamorphosis.

The transformation process symbolically protects the prostitutes against the shame related to their activity. All the women I met in ger No. hide the true nature of their job from their relatives, friends or acquaintances left behind in Mongolia, explaining that they work in hotels or restaurants Women working as prostitutes in France explain that they act in a play, are like in a gamee, elaborate their prostitute's character Handman and Mossuz-Lavau . 20 Women who work as prostitutes in France usually use condoms, in part to take some distancee symbolically ibid... Mongolian women are supposed to always use condoms, but in reality this is not systematic. In comparison with French prostitutes, Mongolian prostitutes develop a less symbolic process to effect distance and to build self protection. They kiss customers for instance, while French prostitutes exclude kisses from their sexual repertoire. This may explain why the character's artifice seems so theatrical in the case of Mongolian women who need to over-invest in their role in order to make up for a lack in symbolic and bodily protection.

in China. Women who come only during the summer to work in Jin Cho tell friends and relatives that they work in Mongolian tourist camps. This activity is somewhat schizophrenic. All the prostitutes I met insist on the psychological dangers related to this dissociative process. For the prostitute, the danger is to lose her sense of self, her real personality, and become just a prostitute in her eyes and in the eyes of others. Besides, the fact that the character of the prostitute lives at night, a temporal disconnection also occurs in the reall individuals, ordinary people who live by day. This dissociation allows these women to live more or less psychologically safely with the prostitute stigmaa Pheterson .

At the end of the night, many of the women furtively leave their customers' hotels and meet in another place in order to drink alcohol together. This is seen by other prostitutes as the behaviour of bad workers, as they may potentially cause a drunken public scene as often fights ensue between prostitutes. Such behaviour seems to underscore the violence and shame of the prostitute stigmaa. Some of the women are alcoholics. In the space of twenty days, the doctor made three visits to ger No. , twice for excessive consumption of alcohol and once for pregnancy. Alcohol potentially gives women the strength to work, and it is also felt to purify tainted bodies at the end of the night. It allows the reconstitution of the full individuall, the associative process of a torn personality. But dissociation results in symbolic and affective violence, which may then lead to violent behaviour.