: the nutag of their parents in Buryatia (Russia) and the nutag of his relatives in China. Wedding ceremonies and jubilees happen frequently among extended family members across the borders of three countries. Gulgonns children also joined the transnational field by choosing to study at a Chinese university in Hohhot under the supervision of his relatives there, while one son studies in Ulan-Ude (Russia) and lives with a family of Dimid's relatives there. Her relatives from Aginskoe decided to send their children to study in Ulaanbaatar (Mongolia), arguing that the future of their children should be secured by living among Mongols who have their own independent statee ööriin güren). In their opinion, all Buriads came to Russian territory from Mongolia several centuries ago, and Mongolia is the real homeland of all "uriad-Mongols. They say,  in earlier times "uriads came to their present nutag from the south, travelling northwards following the Onon river (Onon goloo dakhaad. This widespread folk notion can be related to Bulag's research into the common identity of all Mongol peoples.

The notion that Mongolia is the ancient and present homeland for "uriads was discussed among "uriads not only during the s, in the first flourishing of Buriad ethnic revival after the fall of the Soviet system, but also more recently, from onwards. Recent political processes in Russia-in which the two ethnically defined Buriad autonomous districts (the okrugs of Ust'-Orda in Irkutsk region and Aginskii in Chita region) were dissolved into or unified into the larger territories surrounding them in-were emotionally distressing for all groups of "uriads living in Russia and abroadDiscussions on popular Buriad websites (possible only on the Internet due to the total control of the public media in Russia) have raised the old issues of Russian colonialism and the tragic Buriad experience of colonial encroachment. Here I quote some comments made during the discussion, which show that the ethnic majority (or at least part of it) regard themselves as potential emigrants, ready to move away to join other "uriads if the next stage of Russiaas internal colonizationn proves too hard to bear, just as "uryat migrants did almost a century ago Now

Buriads from Irkutsk region are moving to Buryatia. If Buryatia merges with Irkutsk, where can we escape to-return to Mongolia? Again to leave our native land in search for our survival? and Shall we look for

Buriad stability again in the Mongol world? . The obvious parallels between the earlier colonial and present-day situations have aroused interest among the kin majority in the history of the Buriad emigration to Mongolia and China, and in life there at present. The mutual cultural rediscovery of the Buriad kin-majority and the diasporic kin-minority has produced discussions about where true "uriatness is better preserved, and about whether or not the kin-majority in Russia are still holders of Buriad traditions, even if they live at the main homeland. After trips to parental villages across the border, the second generation diaspora strongly criticise the kin-majority for losing and even betraying "uriad identity in favour of Russificationn. This period of discussion coincided with my field work in diaspora communities in eastern Mongolia, and people there criticised their kin in the Buriad homeland for not being able to resist the political reorganisation. They were blamed for their lack of courage in standing up for their right to ethnic autonomy, for their sheep-like khonin shendi) obedience to the Russians and the Russian state. In conversation with me as one of the kin-majority they expressed sorrow about this situation, saying, You also have lost your homeland (nutagaa aldaat, as happened with our parents beforee.

Personally, I had the impression that the second generation has a feeling of discontinuity between their imagined idealised homeland, which was cultivated by their parents, and the present day situation in Russia where their kin-majority lives. It seems that Buriad territories in Russia differ greatly from the homeland they imagined. This leads to the paradoxical situation that the diaspora second generation is rejecting their parental homeland. The Mongolian journalist Jambaliin Ganga, a native of the Dashbalbar Buriad community in Eastern Mongolia, describes his ambiguous feelings on visiting his parental homeland in Aginskoe when, as a member of a Mongolian delegation, he was invited to the official celebration in Aginskoe of the merger with Chita region:feel the fear of [the Russian] Empire at every step. It looks like"uriads consider Russians to be superior. [That is why "uriads want to] speak Russian better than Russians, drink more than Russians, andorigin, even if they have higher cheekbones than us Mongols. [In the presence of Russians] they wanted to demonstrate that they have nothing in common with Mongols.

Finally, we are witnessing how the last "uriad has been wrapped in a big Russian patchwork blanket and disappeared underneath. There is no Aga anymore on the map. When we were driving back to the Mongolian border I heard someone starting to sing an old song of "uryat] The homeland nutag of Khori "uriads is covered by white fog,

Buriads to sustain kinship ties as one united group, despite political isolation and strictly sealed state borders. And finally, in the post-Soviet era, borders also constitute Buriads as differently positioned groups in relation to Mongol identity. It seems that the new transborder dimension reveals a contradictory situation: the Buriad kin minority which lives in Mongolia in reality belongs to the larger Mongol-majority, and this means that Mongolia not Buryatia is more likely to be considered as the kin-statee for "uriads. In this situation return homecoming can mean not only the return of the kin-minority to