

However, despite the closed nature of the group, the Shenehen Buryats and the Bargas showed joint activism by participating in the creation and in the activities of the People's Party of Inner Mongolia. The Mongolian Peoplees Revolution of resonated greatly with the group. "t the head of the Barga intelligentsia were Merse and Fumintai, who along with the Buryat Tsyden-Eshe Tsydypov, organised a revolutionary circle. In Barga, all-Barga congresses were held annually. During one of them it was decided to organise a people's cooperative in Hulun Buir. Shenehen khoshuu 1 had many old Buryat cooperative members from Tsugol khoshun: Ayusha Tugulturov, Shirnin Badmaev, Vanchik Munkuev, on the basis of which the cooperative was formed. In summer the first cooperative congress was hosted in Shenehen. The number of shareholders grew rapidly. The Chinese Eastern Railways (CER) and Barga princes, including the amban, were especially wealthy investors. The members of the cooperative were active in revolutionary agitation activities. During this period, contacts were made with the leaders of Mongolia, namely with Elbegdorj Rinchino. In summer , the "arga Mongols Tsyden-Eshe Tsydypov and Fumintai were sent to Urga in order to establish friendly ties. The Central Committee of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party asked them to form a branch of the party in Barga. Consequently the Barga People's Party was born. The party included Shenehen Buryat members and maintained relations with Urga, the Soviet ambassador in Beijing, the Consulate of the USSR in Hailar and the leadership of the CER. The People's Revolutionary Party of Inner Mongolia, headed by Merse, also led an armed uprising even as China was beginning to recover from internal crises and assert itself not only within its former borders, but also through a consolidation of centripetal forces Escho pro Shenehennn .

Shenehen authors have noted that during the Socialist period the Shenehen "uryats survived the formation of collective farms, the struggle with the old foundations, as a result of which % of the population became working people, and the best workers and activists became members of the party Tsyrenzhabai "bida. However, on account of the left deviations, the Cultural Revolution and the destruction wreaked by capitalists and Soviet, Mongolian and Japanese spies, many people suffered. Many continued to work, but some become unable to do so Tsyrenzhabai "bida . "ecause of developments in the CER at the end of summer , SovietChinese relations became strained. Concentrated at the border from August to November, Chinese troops made repeated attacks, bombing Soviet territory and pursuing an aggressive repressive policy against immigrants from Russia living near the border, accusing them of spying and committing other counter-revolutionary activities. In addition, those immigrants who had fled dispossession, political purges and hardship-despite having crossed the Soviet-Chinese border-remained under Moscow's control, and so waves of punishment followed. Shenehen "uryats were in a no-win position-to the Chinese they were Soviet spies and to the Soviet Union they were Chinese spies. The Chinese authorities not only allowed the police to beat and torture prisoners, but also held executions without trial or investigation. According to eyewitnesses, the representatives of the NKVD felt completely free on Chinese territory: they arrested and sent people to prisons and labour camps-first to Hailar and then to Chita, and still others to Leningrad. During the interrogations, torture and blackmail (threats of reprisals on close relatives were widely used, and confessions of anti-Soviet espionage and terrorist operations were extracted through coercion.

From the early s onwards, Manchuria became the object of Japanese aggression. The Japanese government, seeking to legalisee its occupation of Manchuria, inspired the creation of the new state of Manchukuo. The period of occupation lasted from to. During this time, substantial changes were made in the political and administrative structure of the region. During the Japanese period, the Buryat khoshun, until then an independent unit with the right to determine and regulate the main issues of domestic life, was abolished and became part of Solon khoshun. One of the residents of Shenehen, Dambyn Dambi, said:

The Japanese were meticulous in giving their orders. Young people were supposed to serve in the Japanese army, and children had to be taught the Japanese language. We learnt it, though during the Manchu period we spoke exclusively in Buryat. Keeping a million-strong Kwantung Army ready for military action in Manchuria caused constant tension on the Soviet-Manchurian border Fieldwork notes, "ugust .

The policy of integration of all non-Han peoples of Northeast and Western

China under the banner of the construction of Greater East "siaa, conducted

by the Japanese during World War II, included the Shenehen Buryats. One of them, Urzhin Garmayev, later Colonel-General of the Kwantung Army, served in the government of Manchukuo. On account of his authority and capacity of organisation, he was entrusted with the formation and training of military units of Buryats and representatives of other Mongolian groups, even before the war officers were trained and a cavalry of over two thousand people was formed.

The main thrust of Tokyo's strategy focused on the ideological neutralisation of Inner Mongolia's local population in the event of an outbreak of hostilities between Japan and the USSR. Under the guise of helping the small nations of China, Japan started to recruit and train agents from the various ethnic communities. Not surprisingly, in "ugust , as the Soviet army advanced in China, "uryats were accused of aiding the enemy. In , several hundred Shenehen "uryats, mostly young men, were taken to the USSR where their traces are lost in prisons and camps "azarov .