On the contrary, this whole city left for the local population to make use of was seen as a long-lasting testimony not only to Russian greatness, but crucially also, to Russian generosity. This, and the sharply contrasted feelings elicited by Chinese presence in the country, was clearly expressed by our driver, a resident of the regional centre Choibalsan who had already been to Mardai once and seemed happy to have this opportunity to return. Gazing at the ruins, after a long discussion on what each building used to be, he commented to us thoughtfully Russians, at least, they left things for us to take Chinese people would have buried everything underground..

Tögsöö could not agree more.

The suspicious neighbour

When prompted to justify their suspicious feelings towards Chinese peoplee collectively and indistinctively referred to as Hyatad, or by the derogatory term Hujaa), Mongolians consistently summon their history, supposedly replete with Chinesee attempts at dominating Mongolia and spoiling its resources.

From the mid seventeenth century until the demise of the Qing dynasty in , Mongolia was known as Outer Mongoliaa, and formed the northern confines of the Sino-Manchu Empire. Following a period of nominal autonomy after the fall of the Qing, Mongolia declared independence in , thereby putting an end to Chinese political domination. Mongolian revolutionaries were assisted in this task by the newly (self-)appointed rulers of Russia, the Bolsheviks, who saw in Mongolian controlled independence a strategic asset against Chinese alleged ambitions in Manchuria and Siberia Rupen. Therefore, Mongolia declared itself in a Peoplees Republic, and was ushered by her new mentor along the path of a non-capitalist way of development.

Of course, Mongolian people's evaluation of their past as part of the Sino-Manchu empire is undoubtedly influenced by the way it was portrayed by propaganda throughout the communist period. As a feudal system whereby (Mongol) lords levied tax on the population for their own benefit and that of the (Manchu) Emperor to whom they answered, the Qing Empire came to be pictured as the epitome of exploitationn the backward evil to be blamed for Mongolian people's economic stagnation over more than three centuries.

Of concern here in this well-known story is the way Sino-Manchu domination during the Qing period has been linked to, or disconnected from, the question of the relationship between Mongolian and Chinese people in general. Official propaganda, especially after the Sino-Soviet split in the beginning of s, has actually gone in two different directions. On the one hand, Chinese people, and by extension the People's Republic of China, were denied any responsibility in Qing Empirees political domination over Mongolia Rupen. "ccording to history, Party officials emphasised, it is the Manchus who conquered and ruled Mongolia, not the Chinese: therefore, China has never had control over Mongolia, and cannot assert any claim over Mongolian territory.

Yet, on the other hand, Chinese people were blamed for their economic exploitation of Mongolian people "awden Chinese merchants, backed up by the Imperial administration, were accused of having taken an active part in the pauperisation of Mongolian people through their unfair credit policy. Besides, the individuals who had become renown for looting Chinese shops or even for burning them down, were celebrated as Robin Hood-like figures of social justice. "ll in all, the massive indebtedness of a great part of Mongolian population to these merchants is widely remembered until today, and vigorously recalled whenever relationships between China and Mongolia are evoked. As a matter of fact, not only is there a very strong sentiment today that Chinese presence in Mongolia has been nothing but exploitative and ruinous, but moreover, Chinese people are seen as essentially greedy, animated by the unique will to selfishly appropriate the resources of Mongolia.

The exact extent to which these ideas are the direct outcome of Soviet inspired propaganda lies beyond the scope of this chapter. Yet, since commercial relations resumed between Mongolia and China in the early s, as Chinese workers came to look for jobs, and as Chinese investors started to express their interest in Mongolian land and resources, the population widely expressed fears regarding Chinese people's appropriative intentions. Neo-nationalist movements such as Dayaar Mongol have given voice to these concerns "illé , , which have also found expression in hip-hop songs-some of which have gone as far as to call for murder "illé-Delaplace .

More generally, rumours circulate about continuous attempts by Chinese government or population to exterminate, or at least harm, Mongolian people "illé .

Frontier Encounters

Chinese ghosts in Mongolia

One of these rumours, which could be heard particularly in Ulaanbaatar, but also in the Eastern region of Dornod where Mongolian, Russian and Chinese borders meet, is particularly telling. People report being haunted by Chinese ghosts Hyatad süns): souls of Chinese merchants who allegedly remained attached to the goods-often gold or silk-they have buried under the ground before they died). These ghosts appear as white-bearded old men, who speak in broken Mongolian and with a distinct Chinese accent. They claim their wealth, and threaten to harm anyone who dares to come too close to it. These stories often insist that although victims ask shamans and lamas to come and perform rituals, none of these are effective: Chinese envious shunalt) souls are thought to stick to the place no matter what the new occupants do. Sometimes, the Mongol residents are even forced to satisfy the soul's greed with continuous gifts, until they can bear it no more and decide to move away. In these stories, Chinese people are pictured as some kinds of parasites, who pump up resources and suck out Mongolian people's blood. These stories also tend to equate present-day Chinese businessmen with the colonial merchants of the past-those who are still resented today for ruining the Mongolian population before the Revolution