

•• processing of fish, sea products and caviar for small-enterprise purposes (cutting, salting, packaging), without issue of the documentation appropriate to conducting such business; •• creation of enterprises carrying out illegal traffic in fish products, including businesses registered to figureheads; and •• trade without documents or with forged documents (including under the guise of products confiscated by conservation organisations).

Many practices are to some extent connected with cross-border exchanges-fish caught illegally are sent to China using false documents:

In the course of search operations, it was revealed that the CEO of one of Vladivostok firms, had acquired for profit more than tonnes of frozen salmon and about tonnes of salt without any documents and had signed a contract with a Chinese firm for the supply of this fish. To obtain the necessary documents for export, three certificates of quality issued by another firm were presented to the Primorye office for Rossel'khoznadzor. On the basis of these documents, veterinary certificates were obtained. To make it look as described in the accompanying papers, on the order of the CEO, the entire fish production was packed into bags tagged with the name of the company listed in the fake quality documentation. After that, the dishonest dealers registered the cargo as export, and part of the cargo was sent to China. But when they attempted to send another batch of vehicles with the fish products, they were detained simultaneously in three places by the Far Eastern Customs Service: in Ussuriysk, in Vladivostok and in the Khasan area…… FCS .

The FSB and the Federal Customs Service reported informal fishing practices in Russian waters by Chinese citizens, and in particular concerning: Chinese fishermen obstructing the Amur with their nets and not complying with the border regime; buying of illegally obtained fish for export to China, smuggling of fish products; organisation of informal small-enterprise teams on both sides of the river; and the creation of enterprises involved in illegal fishing and/or fish export, including businesses registered to figureheads. Fishing on the opposite (Russian) coast is the most common practices of the private (i.e. non-commercial) use of cross-border natural resources by citizens of the PRC. The aspiration of Chinese to catch fish on Russian territory is due to the fact that, in China, former fishing grounds are significantly regulated by dams, are degraded by industrial pollution, and wild fish populations have been legally and extensively fished for many years, for both commercial and domestic purposes. As a result, many species of fish have disappeared. On the Russian side legal fishing has always been limited, and industrial and agricultural pollution has been lower.

Every year, jointly agreed periods of total fishing ban are set with the aim of preserving fish stocks' reproduction. During these periods, operations are carried out by the Russian border guards in conjunction with other services to halt these types of activities (commonly known as the Fishing-season-Amur special campaign). The majority of the reports in the analysed basis were made precisely during that campaign: from 11 June to July , more than boats with Chinese citizens were detained FSS in , over the same period, charges were made FSS in , in one day, about fishermen went fishing on boats FSS b.

"oth amateurs and professional teams are involved in informal fishing activities. Even when they hold an official licence, professionall fishing teams often do not respect the periods and locations specified on the licence, evade fiscal payments and also fail to respect employment requirements for their employees. The seasonal work of paid fisherman is extremely difficult, requiring great physical and moral strength (every evening and early morning the fishermen place and remove the nets and all day gut and salt the fish), and in case of sickness or other force majeure they are not remunerated. Sometimes, Chinese are hired to carry out such work:

In the Far Eastern region, on the "mur River, in the area of Smidovichesky in the Jewish Autonomous Region, border guards foiled an attempt by a group of poachers consisting in five Chinese and three Russians to fish salmon… As it turned out, a local entrepreneur had organised an international group of poachers. He had hired some Chinese who had come to Russia on a visa but did not have the right to be in the border area and had promised them a solid reward if the plan to fish salmon was successful. The detained poachers were transferred to law enforcement authorities for triall FSS aa.

Prior to the recent changes in legislation differentiating between amateur and commercial fishermen, a clear dividing linee existed, and it never occurred to those who engaged in commercial production to call themselves amateurs. Following changes in legislation, it became beneficial to informal traders to be registered as amateurs. The head of Federal Agency for Fishing declared a sub-category of fishermen has now emerged who catches dozens or hundreds of kilos of fish. When our service for the conservation of fish detains them, they say-we are amateur fishermen, we have the right… one hundred, two hundred, three hundred kilos of fishh. In terms of legislation, the Chinese fishermen who are active on Russian territory can not in any case be classified as amateurs. It would be interesting nonetheless to find out to what extent this activity is commercial or private. Out of the eighteen cases, the FSB pointed out in fourteen of them that they had caught a group of people. However, it is far from clear in these cases whether these violations constitute an individual strategy or whether they represent a particular operation through a business scheme. For example, the following quote mentions a specific Chinese citizenn, however the volume and price of the exports points to a commercial nature of the operation: