Linguistic devices inciting phobia in order to maintain the unacceptability of Chinese poaching are common. Factuall evidence is also employed for these aims, provoking widespread, often negative, discussion of the transfer of islands to China:

The fact is that Chinese fishermen, even before the demarcation of the area of Tarabarov and Bolshoi Ussurii islands, began to take over the waters still belonging to Russia. Border guards claim that poachers in the area began to violently resist arrest, arguing that they were catching their own fish in their own territory Sergeev .

The media discusses negatively not only the poaching carried out in Russian waters, but more generally any fishing activities in the Amur by the Chinese, including those carried out in their own waters:

Khabarovsk residents have heard that our Chinese neighbours exploit the fish stocks of the "mur far more actively than us stating that the Chinese and us have different attitudes to the river-is not saying anything new, Sergey Denisovich argues Pimin .

Interestingly, certain scientific texts (which because of their paucity were not analysed quantitatively) include similar rhetoric:

Poaching by Chinese fishermen is the scourge of the Middle "mur.

Uncoordinated with the Russian side, the construction of dams on the Chinese coast will lead to an intensification of the erosion of our coast. In fact, China will certainly play a leading role in the ecological destabilisation of the Amur basin and of the river itself. If Russia and China do not take action, the additional human impacts on the larger ecosystem of the Amur basin may lead to a regional environmental crisis even without any dams on the main riverbed Podolskyi and Gotvinskyi .

The social basis of texts that discuss or mention Russian poaching on the Amur River differs significantly in terms of words most frequently used and include the following categories: fish, roubles, thousands, poacher, Amur, Russia, market, goods and the past. Overall, these texts show much more diversity in both form and content and deal with characteristic stocks, the consumer market and its security problems and market competition with China: this year red fish is increasingly directed towards "eijing but even the increase in domestic prices in Russia in comparison to

China does not bring more humpback salmon to native stalls but Russians do not see it on their shelves or tables and Chinese businesses quickly pay for goods delivered and, if necessary, in cash, unlike Russian companies. They also note that poachers only play a secondary rolee The number of poachers in the lower reaches of the Amur River has decreased significantly fishing enterprises and national communities, let alone poachers, fish in the lower reaches of the "mur and half are caught by poachers and by the unemployed population.. It is interesting that a few texts about fishing activities on the Amur border river published on the Russian-speaking Chinese sites give a sense of acknowledgement by their neighbours of their guilt. Contextual use of categories most frequently encountered underscore the social significance of fishing for local populations (ethnic groups, descendants of fishermen), and of the ongoing efforts to increase fish stocks which were previously destroyed in a predatory mannerr The border line between China and Russia had been fully settled Chinese fishing industries foster the protection of rare types of fish that live in the Heilongjiang this is the third release of young fish organised by the Chinese government more than 20 tons of quality young fish are found in this river Fish from the river represents the main source of income for local residents her father is a fisherman, a husband-a veterannn fisherman Guan Sanchen, a member of the Xibo ethnic group there, as before, the population engages in fishing activities Russia and China are world powers China and Russia act jointly and on both sides of the border one find Russian and Chinese houses.

In general, when comparing the basis of publications on Chinese and Russian poaching, the conclusion can be reached that Chinese poaching is considerably more widespread than Russian (though WWF analytical reports indicate the opposite). Both official and unofficial texts aim at reinforcing the strict social unacceptability of the Chinese poaching in Russian waters, but not against Russian poaching in the border river. Never was there a direct indication that the numerous violations of prohibitions by Russian fishermen have an impact on resource conditions in the common border river. On the contrary, informal communications suggest that Russians have a right to the resources of the border river, and that the Chinese have already lost this right on account of their behaviour.

However, such rhetoric constitutes a direct path to the realisation of the full tragedy of the commons, i.e. to the final exhaustion of limited resources.

Of the eight principles articulated by Ostrom relating to increasing the likelihood of success in solving dilemmas of coordination between individual and social interests, none are met in the case of the cross-border Amur river. However, three in particular are critically infringed. First of all, according to Ostrom, the rules should be worked out by the players themselves: both Russia and China are strongly centralised states, and all formal rules, common to all regions and communities, are produced at the top of the power hierarchy. Second, the rights of users of fish resources to self-organise and establish their own rules are not actually (or formally) recognised by local and central authorities to any extent. Therefore, any decision can be made only on the basis of unanimity, not only within the groups of Russian or Chinese fishermen, but also between them. However, to achieve such unanimity, enormous cost and time resources are required-a task insurmountable within reasonable timescales. Third, resource users are not able to appoint or select overseers accountable to them. On the contrary, the main controllers are the representatives of the centre (the State Security Service, for example).