One of the sagas of Chinese political modernity was a fight between nationalism and provincialism. Towards the end of the Qing dynasty, as the Manchu rulers began to rely on the Chinese for both defending China against western powers and for quelling Muslim rebellions in Gansu, Chinese provinces emerged as autonomous political entities, eventually defying the Manchu-dominated Qing centre when the latter was weakened by the western powers. Provinces were not initially granted any autonomy from the central authority, as were Mongolian banners. However, once the ideal of self-rule was introduced, especially in relation to a perceived alien empire, it was the Qing-created provincial lines that became the natural divisions for the new political articulation of self-rule. In the Qing court officially recognised and even promoted provincial selfrule as a new governmental measure to salvage the crumbling empire, thereby opening Pandoraas "ox. Hunan for the Hunanesee, Guangdong for the Guangdong peoplee and so on became the slogans of the epoch, and provinces became the most important bastion for anti-Manchu activities. And yet the provincial divisions had become equally entrenched, challenging a unified action among Han anti-Manchu revolutionaries. Sun Yatsen's Xinzhonghui, established in , was an exclusivist Guangdong organisation, and the leading revolutionaries were divided into provincial factions, each insisting on their own provinces as the basis for launching the anti-Qing uprising Liu Su . However, once the Qing was overthrown, leading Chinese nationalists envisioned that China's power must come from a unitary and centralised state, an ideal stemming from their observation of the rise of modern Japan. In this vision, provincial autonomy was deemed a challenge to the new national centre, fragmenting the new nation into numerous local kingdoms ruled by military strongmen. Thus, prior to the northern campaign by the Chinese Nationalist Party (Guomindang), China was beset with wars among provincial strongmen, which contributed to the Guomindang's desire for a unitary and centralised polity. The debate between a unitary state model and a confederate state model was ultimately won on the battle front, with the nationalists militarily unifying China in , discrediting the provincial strongmen as local warlords, and local provincial autonomy as feudal separatist rule (fengjian geju Duara Fitzgerald .

The Guomindang dream for a unitary state was realised by the CCP in . In the first four years of the Peoplees Republic until , province was made a second tier administrative unit, below da xingzhengqu, great administrative region, of which China had six, plus one autonomous region, i.e. the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. As this cursory examination of provincialism shows, Chinese nationalism has had to grapple with internal borders instituted by the Manchu, and this continues to be a thorny issue. Provincial identity often contributes to political factions in the ruling Communist Party, and the Party seldom appoints a provincial native to the position of the province's party secretary. The autonomist tendency of Chinese provinces and the stringent measures adopted against it challenges one of the political mythologies of China that a unified China was achieved as early as the Qin dynasty two thousand years ago. It also behooves us to remember that provinces were first set up by the Mongols during the Yuan, abolished by the Ming, and restored by the Qing, which divided the Chinese regions into eighteen provinces, which were together called China Proper by Westerners.

Inter-ethnic border or international border?

As we have shown, nationalists reject internal borders; Chinese and the Mongol nationalists are in agreement that the Qing imperial governance was predicated on a divide and rule policy. What they do not agree on, however, is what to do with the inter-ethnic borders erected between the Mongols and the Chinese.

"y the end of the Qing dynasty, Chinese nationalists had largely accepted the eighteen provinces created by the Qing as Zhongguo Benbu (China Proper), and their original ambition was no more than to drive the Manchu out of these provinces. The nationalist flag used during the Wuchang Uprising on the th October was called flag of the iron blood and eighteen stars tiexue shibaxing qi)-eighteen stars representing eighteen Chinese provinces. "lthough on the January the Republic of China instated a five-colour striped flag symbolising a newly declared union of five races (wuzu gonghe), the flag of iron blood and eighteen stars was retained it was used as flag of the army until , when the

First, Baotuwan, which was occupied by Jing Xiuyue, and the area which was occupied by Gao Shixiu, along with the two salt ponds, will be returned to the Inner Mongolian people. Moreover, the area along the Great Wall, including places such as Ningtiaoliang, Anbian, and Dingbian, is designated as a commercial area, in order to promote bilateral trade between you and

Mongol nationalists also accepted the Qing ethnic border along the Great Wall and the northern part of the Willow Palisade as the national border of the Mongols. In-the government of "ogd Khan Mongolia sent five columns of cavalry to liberate Inner Mongolia only to lose its own independence in , becoming an autonomy recognising Chinaas suzerainty. In the Mongolian Peoplees Republic army marched into

Inner Mongolia against Japan, and briefly entertained the idea of unifying

Inner Mongolia with the MPR only to gain formal recognition of its independence by the Republic of China in Liu. Henceforth, pan-Mongolism died as a political programme, and Inner Mongolia was to emerge as an autonomous region within China. When the region took its current shape in , it lost a quarter of the Mongolian population, including the Mongoljin, to the neighbouring provinces, and most of its land along the Great Wall and the Willow Palisade. However, while the Mongols continue to think in terms of the borders created by the Qing, this national geography has been challenged by the Chinese. In the early s Lin Gan, arguably the most prominent Chinese historian of the northern peoples, furiously debunked the idea that the Great Wall and the Willow Palisade should be seen as the national border of China. He was careful not to criticise the independent state of Mongolia, but blame two external imperialists, the Japanese and the Soviets, for introducing this idea. He denounced the Soviets for following the Japanese assertion of "eyond the Great Wall is no longer Chinaa by quoting the following passage, a statement issued by the Soviet government in June , at the height of the Sino-Soviet confrontationn