7. Prostitution and the Transformation of the Chinese Trading Town of Ereen

Gaëlle Lacaze

Since the s, a large part of the informal trade conducted by Mongols from China to Russia by way of Mongolia has followed the trans-Mongolian railway, in existence since as the main transit route for commercial exchanges between "eijing and Moscow. It was reopened in People's

Daily Online. It then became the Mongolian suitcasee traders' privileged path, compelling the Mongolian and Chinese governments to regulate the number of people crossing their common border. According to the people who were there during the s, Ereen hot Ereen city was then a very small city, with few asphalt streets, essentially limited to the current central square (seeAt that time, the city was permeated by a foul smell due to a lack of a sewer system. The cross-border place of Erlian-Zamyn üüd was planned during the year 2000 along the railway as a Free Trade Zone by a Chinese-Mongolian bipartite contract; this contract implemented a system of permission for I would like to thank all the members of the North Asian Borders Network, particularly the publishing team and Franck Billé for their editing work on my article.

short stays in the trans-frontier zone. The Free Trade Zone of Erlian-Zamyn üüd later became for Mongols the main place of transit for Chinese industrial goods. In the 2000s, the city developed into an open market city and almost % of Mongolian commercial exchanges with China cross the border at this place Ministry of Industry and Trade. "y , urban infrastructures had been highly developed, with the bad smell of the city now but a distant memory. Overall, the Chinese government has invested almost ,,,,,,,, RM" [US$ .. million] for the city's development People's Daily Online .

I have been conducting research on Mongols' activities in this Free

Trade Zone since. The first results of this research reveal the global organisation of the zone. Ereen acts as a big market-city while Zamyn üüd remains a transit place for people and goods. This chapter first examines the transformation of Ereen from to. The main changes are the construction of New Ereenn in the western section of the city the opening in the south of two huge supermarkets, as large as an entire block, dedicated to construction materials; and the sculptures of dinosaurs, in the southwest, past the city gates on the road to Beijing. These changes are a good illustration of the local government's main political goals with regard to the city's development. I then examine how the appropriation of the city by Mongolian migrants underlines differential postures in terms of gender, social status and economic power. It sheds light on a new kind of nomadic activity developed by Mongols who have appropriated for themselves the political management of the city. I conclude with an analysis of the daily life of several Mongolian prostitutes. The type of sex work found in the city of Ereen reveals the contemporary strategies of some Mongolian women.

The context

While Ereen is a large open market, Zamyn üüd resembles some modern caravanserai (see. Both places attract many manual workers since the numerous commercial exchanges lead to new jobs and work opportunities such as, for instance, carrying goods, loading and unloading trucks or wagons, etc. Every day, numerous Mongols cross the border at Zamyn üüd and Ereen and their numbers increase year after year. They are itinerant traders, wholesalers chanjuud) as well as retailers (naimaachin), or temporary-permanent migrants such as drivers jolooch) and prostitutes (yanhan). Because Mongolian citizens have the right to stay in China for thirty days without registration, some have been working and living in Ereen for several years without a visa, simply returning to Mongolia once a month. These monthly trips across the Mongolian-Chinese border enable them to permanently remain temporary migrants in China. I am referring to them here as temporary-permanent migrants.

During the summer, Ereen also welcomes many Mongolian tourists. Indeed, the Mongolian new richh travel there to purchase furniture, school equipment or construction materials at a lower price than they would at home. These shoppers also like to travel to Ereen because they have free time to spend in the bars, restaurants, nightclubs and brothels the city has to offer.In the month of July in particular, a large funfair stands on the city's central square and numerous tourist attractions sprout all over during the hot season.

The temporary-permanent workers facilitate the itinerant traders' activities. The chanjuud and the yanhan stay longer in Ereen than the naimaachin and the jolooch, who carry out multiple trips between Zamyn üüd and Ereen, between Mongolia and China. The chanjuud and jolooch are mostly men, while the naimaachin and yanhan are mostly women. Thus, the appropriation of the Free Trade Zone of Erlian-Zamyn üüd by Mongols illustrates the transformations that take place in the social organisation and gender relationships of contemporary Mongolian societies, both in Mongolia and China.