8. Ritual, Memory and the Buriad Diaspora Notion of Home

Sayana Namsaraeva

Nayan-Nava-a horse flew

Nayan-Nava-a nomad sang: Wherever I unsaddle my horse There will be my home and my homeland……-Bair Dugarov, contemporary Buriad poetIn recent years there has been a rapid growth in the number of studies exploring transnational, transborder and diasporic lives, some of which reflect on trans-state processes after the collapse of the Soviet Union. The emphasis is on the increase in trans-border mobility and especially on cross-border contacts between different segments of one ethnic people, those living outside the homeland in diasporas and those who constitute what I call the the kin-majority in the historical or national homeland Diener Safran Kosmarskaya Markowitz Shami Sanders forthcoming). With the dramatic political and economic changes in post-socialist countries, it has become clear that new socio-spatial entities have emerged, where ethnic space functions beyond the territorial boundaries of nation states.

This chapter is an effort to advance our understanding of recent developments in the region of North Asia shared between Russia, China and Mongolia by examining the trans-border dimension of Buriad 2 social space. Being an ethnic minority in all these countries, the Buriads can be described using anthropological theories of diaspora. Those Buriads who moved away from Russian colonisation in Eastern Siberia almost a century ago will be referred to as diasporaa groups or kin minorities they consist of ,,,, people living inin Inner Mongolia. Those who stayed behind at their home villages in the Transbaikal region Russiaa are referred to as the kin majority and they comprise ,,,, people. Meanwhile, the neighboring Mongol speaking territories just across the border to which the newcomers moved (Hulun Buir in Inner Mongolia, China, and the eastern provinces aimags in Mongoliaa are called host societies, or sometimes host countries if there is need to stress the public policies toward the newcomers.

Relations with homee and with the host society continue to be distinguishing features of diasporas. Robin Cohen and William Safran both stress the role of the host country with its public policies toward the newcomers and a homeland orientationn as being among the major elements distinguishing diasporas from ordinary immigrant expatriate communities. Therefore, a key issue regarding the Buriads who moved to Mongolia and China and have now already lived there for several generations is to define what is homee in their understanding we need to ask whether or not they still have a homeland orientation after generational changes, and if so, where they locate it. If we take various historical cases of migration, it could easily be imagined that movers scattered away outside the homeland and formed diaspora groups, while stayers continued to live at the homeland. However, I am wary about using the term homeland in this way in the Buriad context, because, as I will show later, there is confusion and ambivalence in defining what is homeland nutag), not only from diasporic perspectives but also from the majority Buriad point of view. This being the case, I shall pursue the goal Throughout this article, I use the spelling "uriad rather than the alternative "uriat, the Russian spelling "uryat or Chinese spelling "u-li-ya-tee. This is becausee this is the Buriad official spelling based on Cyrillic according to the Buriad-Orod dictionary Cheremisov , and only in the "uriad Republic Russiaa does the "uriad language have the status of being one of the official languages, unlike in either Mongolia or Inner Mongolia (China). The Khori dialect was taken as the point of reference for Buriad literary language. of ascertaining not only the different notions of the Buriad homeland and what they might mean to people in diasporas, but also the idea of having several homelands in a much broader context-from the perspectives of different generations, and at different geographical and historical points.

The choice to concentrate my field research in particular Buriad diaspora communities-in Bayan-Uul, Dadal and Dashbalbar in Eastern Mongolia, and in Hulun Buir in Inner Mongolia-was determined mostly by the migration routes of some Aga Buriad 3 families (who were close kin relations of my grandparents' families in the villages Uzon and Suduntui in the Aga steppe-nowadays the Aginskii district in Zabaikal'ski krai, Russia). The intended final destination for many such refugees was Hulun Buir in Inner Mongolia, but only some of them succeeded in reaching it, because the long march through Eastern Mongolia was exhausting for families with young children and for the cattle. Many families decided to slow down at thinly populated and convenient places with enough space for grazing along the Ulzii gol river in Eastern Mongolia, where they ended up establishing several permanent communities. Thus many families on the movee were segmented into smaller parts and re-dispersed in the areas around the settlements along the migration route (see map in Appendix II highlighting "uriad emigration in the s and s. The devastating political persecutions of "uriads in the s and forced relocations during military actions in Eastern and Inner Mongolia during the Second World War caused renewed chaos, and people were again separated from their kin. Many were unable to find each other for decades.

Before addressing the main topic, I want to add some self-reflective notes on research ethics. One may see me as of a native anthropologist: born in a Buriad family in Aginskoye (Russia). However, I began research on Buriad diasporic groups only recently. Distanced from this natal society due to many factors, I think of myself as neither an insider nor an indigenous researcher, and I do not claim an authentic point of view to the anthropological community. Kirin Narayan, who herself has a complicated family background, critiqued almost twenty years ago the traditional view that polarised reall and nativee anthropologists and the sharp divide between insiders