

The Kangxi emperor decided to abandon the Great Wall, so that henceforth there was no more division between the south and the north, no more distinction between the Chinese and barbarians, genuinely becoming one family, endowing Central Kingdom with contemporary meaning of China. Abandoning the Great Wall was tantamount to dismantling a barrier wall that segregated the great masses of the Han from the three northernn minority nationalities, rapidly forming an unprecedented multinationality state of grand unity. This decision of the Kangxi Emperor, while abandoning the earth and stone Great Wall, built instead a national Great Wall of collective willl, which was no doubt an epochal breakthrough of the theory of grand unity, a great pioneering undertaking!

The admirers of the Kangxi Emperor's grand political philosophy ignored what he might have really thought; they conveniently forgot or did not realise that he in fact lied about his dynasty needing no wall. It is true that the Manchu did not repair the Great Wall, but it was in , during Kangxiis own reign-, that a different kind of wall, the Willow Palisade, was built, which had been initiated by his father the Shunzhi Emperor Lee well before he boasted about consolidating the empire without relying on the perilous mountains and rivers in , a year when the Khalkha Mongols submitted to the Qing.

The main arguments that I will elaborate on in the remainder of this chapter are the following. Contrary to conventional assumptions, empires built by nomads or semi-nomads did have a sense of border and boundary. The Manchu Qing, and for this matter the Mongol Yuan, had a strong sense of border, using it as a political technique to manage the disparate populations within the empire. One of the distinct characteristics of Inner Asian conquest dynasties was the dual rule instituted to administer the conquered Chinese population separately from their own ethnics. The Mongols in fact created a native chieftainship (tusi) system to rule non-Mongol and non-Chinese populations in the Yuan separate from the Mongols and Chinese who were administered in provinces (xinsheng), another Mongol invention (Bulag 2010a).

This proposal that empires have borders is by no means a novel idea. After all, one of the key techniques used by rulers, imperial or otherwise, is divide and rulee. What I suggest is special about the Qing is the enormous degree to which internal borders had been codified and policed, and the severe consequences such borders have had for the post-imperial communities. The histories of nationalism of both the Mongols and the Chinese are deeply intertwined with border maintenance and border dismantlement. I propose therefore to take a closer look at the internal borders within the Qing Empire and the nationalist backlashes. "elow I will first look at the Mongolian and Chinese internal borders separately before examining the common border between them.

Inter-Mongolian borders

The Manchu Qing governance of the Mongols has had a profound long-term impact on the Mongols. On the one hand, the Manchu unified all the disparate Mongolian groups by alternate means of alliance and conquest. It was under the Qing administration that the ethnonym Mongol was used to override such ethnonyms as Oirad and Horchin, expanding the name that had earlier been monopolized by the Chinggisid six tumens (see Crossley . "lmost all the Mongols, except the "uryats in southern Siberia and the Kalmyks who migrated to the Volga region, were administered by the Lifan Yuan (Board of Colonial Affairs, M. γadaγadu mongγul-un törü-yi jasaqu yabudal-un yamun), inculcating a sense of unified Mongolian identity as opposed to the Manchu, Tibetans, Muslims and Han. Segregation, according to Mark Elliott, was a key Qing mode of governance, that is, segregating the Manchus from the conquered and/or subordinate peoples in order to maintain what he calls ethnic sovereignty. 񮽙 The Qing segregation policy was, in his view, partly responsible for the institutionalisation of ethnic groups, each of whom was not only named, but also segregated from others.

On the other hand, this ethnically-unified Mongolia was not to be a unitary political entity. 10 Instead, they were subdivided into numerous smaller units, from aimag (tribes) and chuulgan (leagues) to hoshuun (banners). The six leagues of inner jasag (later known as Inner Mongolia) were divided into banners, and the Khalkha later known as Outer Mongoliaa were divided into banners. There were also numerous other banners outside the two large entities. Borders were demarcated and policed between tribes, leagues and even between banners. Karun (M. Haruul, C. Kalun) border control stations were set up along borders, and stone cairns called oboo were built between karuns. At strategic places, each karun was manned by-soldiers from Manchu garrison armies stationed in Suiyuan, Ningxia, Uliastai and other places; they would patrol along

The Manchu segregated themselves from the Chinese wherever they set up garrison cities. 10 See Johan Elverskog for the transformation of the Mongol polity from ulus to banner.

the border every day to the oboo between karuns, where they exchanged information with patrols from the other karun. This was called khaich yavakh, scissor-walking, a metaphor implying that the soldiers were cutting the borderline like scissors, making a radical partition. These karuns and oboos would be checked by Manchu garrison generals once a month and they would be inspected by officials from the Lifan Yuan in Beijing occasionally.