

The necessity to resolve this social dilemma is far more pressing when it comes to resources of common use (such as water resources from seas and rivers, common pastures, national parks, etc.). Common pool resources (CPR) may be available either for all or for only a limited number of individuals. The first alternative is referred to as CPR with open access (water in a river, air in a city), the second is CPR with restricted access (national parks). The situation in which a few individuals acting independently and rationally in the pursuit of their own interests, ultimately destroying the limited common resources, is known in the scientific literature as the tragedy of the commons/common accessibility. This pessimistic view of CPR was first described in Garrett Hardinns work. He pointed out that ownership of public resources may take place if: a) the right to ownership was never established; b) the State has legalised it; c) there are no effective controls in place; and d) it is virtually impossible to implement it.

In the theoretical frameworks aimed at a resolution of the CPR dilemma, a key question has long remained Why do people choose or should choosee a rule that will constrain or restrict their choice? "uchanan and Yon .

A large number of cases has accumulated, demonstrating that the resolution of this social dilemma takes place in the negotiation process, provided the community has the opportunity and time to organise itself. The outcome will be different if the resolution of the issue is attempted through coercion-by state intervention, for instance, and the nationalisation of resources Ostrom,. "n overview of theoretical works suggests that the resolution of the problem of informal practices in the use of common pool resources is achievable through the resolution of the social issue of harmonisation between individual and common interests.

Characteristics of the empirical basis

Given that the focus of this paper's research interests are the institutional provision mechanisms (both legal and social) guaranteeing the implementation of standards in nature management, and that the media constitute one of the mechanisms to ensure this, empirical data will essentially be based on media materials. This empirical basis will include: a. A normative basis (the Russian Constitution, the Water Code (Vodny Codex), federal laws relating to fishing and the state border, various regulations and agreements). b. An official basis-publications of the Russian Federation's Federal Security Service (FSB) and the Federal Customs Service.The choice to include these bases was informed by the fact that these services are officially responsible for the ongoing representation in Russia of the fight against smuggling. This representation is limited by many objective and subjective factors, such as internal (customs management) or external (i.e. originating from the federal centre) policies concerning the frequency and nature of links to the public. However, these same constraints can be interpreted as advantages, given that formal regulations are supported not only by concrete strong actions, but also by congruent discursive practices. Accordingly, a change in the frequency of official reports about sanctions, or indications within those reports of an increase in the severity of penalties can be viewed as signals directed to adjust informal practices. 񮽙 c. A social basis-authored publications in the media, posted on Internet sites, relating to violations of Russian fishing regulations by Chinese social Chinaaa and Russian social Russiaaa citizens. 񮽙 If the bases of the FSB and the Federal Customs Service have been studied with a view to typifying and characterising informal practices, journalistic texts have been examined in order to study the characteristics of social enforcement. The number of authored newspaper pieces in each basis equals the number of statements in the official basis, totalling texts.

d. A Chinese basis-publications of the Chinese news agencies Xinhua and Renmin Ribao. 񮽙 The idea to refer to these texts was to compare Chinese and Russian mass media from the point of view of social enforcement in respect to the resources of common rivers.

Unfortunately, due to the small number of these texts, formal quantitative comparison is impossible and only a few qualitative conclusions have been drawn.