The previous day, at a banquet with several retired Mongolian cadres from the Fuxin Mongolian Autonomous County, one of them pronounced proudly to us that the Mongoljin 񮽙 Mongols in Liaoning Province still maintain their Mongolian identity well, and they have been serving as a Great Wall (chang cheng) protecting Inner Mongolia. Another elder, having learnt that I am from Ordos, said that the Ordos Mongols speak Mongolian with a strong Shaanxi Chinese accent, whereas the Mongoljin Mongols speak the most authentic Mongolian. I admitted readily that we in Inner Mongolia are not holding our cultural ground as well as we should. Afterwards, Burensain, who has been studying the region for more than a decade, confided that the Mongoljin suffered heavily during the Jindandao cult rebellion in , when they lost more than 10,000 lives at the hands of the Han Chinese tenants who tilled Mongol land see "orjigin Dai Wang. Today, these Mongolian retired cadres, known as local elders, nutgiin övgöd, 񮽙 run three associations: the first pertains to the promotion of Mongolian culture, the second to the study of China's ethnic autonomy laws, and the third to the study of tourism. Sophisticated in political skills, they have been relentless in their pursuit of justice, making use of every bit of China's Constitution and laws, especially the Regional Nationality Autonomy Law.

In the past decade, these elders have campaigned effectively against the term Menggu Daifu (Mongolian doctor), a Chinese ethnic slur which characterises Mongolian doctors as low-skilled and cruel veterinary surgeons. 񮽙 More recently, they have successfully challenged the Han-dominated standing committee of the autonomous county Party Committee, by persuading the higher authority to make it a Mongol majority committee to reflect the Mongolian titularity of the autonomous county. This was no small feat, and in fact unheard of anywhere else in China.

Remarkably, deep inside China, in the thick of the Chinese population, the Mongoljin Mongols are still fighting at the foot of the Willow Palisade to defend their identity and interest. In this chapter, I re-examine the borders in empire and nation in China and Inner Asia.

The Mongoljin Mongols used to be part of the Tumed Tumen, one of the six Tumens of Central Mongols ruled by Chinggisid princes. During the Qing, they were organised into the Tumed Left Wing Banner, belonging to the Josotu League of Inner Mongolia. In the banner was re-organised as Fuxin Mongolian "utonomous County in Liaoning province see "ao and Xiang . The Mongoljin Mongols used to have an elders assembly, övgödiin chuulgan, which led a major rebellion against the Qing in-see Tai and Jin-. " cursory discussion of the campaign can be found in "ulag .

Frontier Encounters

Rethinking imperial and national borders

The Willow Palisade is a ditch and embankment planted with willows; its construction started in and was completed in. Resembling the Chinese character 人 (ren, human), the palisade starts from the Shanhaiguan Fortress, at the eastern end of the Great Wall, and terminates at the western end of the Korean border. This was the old palisade (lao bian), built to prevent the Mongols and Koreans from entering the heartland of Manchuria.

A new palisade (xin bian) was added, starting from Weiyuanbaomen gate and ending at Fadiha gate, which was built from to. This palisade was built to prevent the so-called wild Jurchens from entering interior Manchuria see Edmonds . The Willow Palisade was not the only border the Qing instituted. The Qing dynasty also demarcated arguably the worlds first international border with the Russian Empire, as documented by Peter Perdue. This is extraordinary and interesting because the builders of these borders and walls were not the sedentary Chinese, but the Manchu, a semi-nomadic Inner Asian people, 񮽙 and this fact alone goes against much of current thinking on borders in empires and nations, a point I will elaborate below. I am tempted to call the Qing dynasty a border-building empire.

Conventional studies of Chinese nationalism focus almost exclusively on extraterritoriality and unequal treaties that gave western powers enormous privileges in China after the first Opium War-. Liu Xiaoyuan, a Chinese-American historian of Chinese and Inner Asian international relations, argues, however, that we pay more attention to Chinese obsession with territoriality. For him, Chinese nationalism is marked by China's territorial expansionism and incorporation of Inner "sian borderlands into the territories of the Chinese republic Liu. While this is correct, I think he errs in claiming that a clearly demarcated border was the product of nationalist modernity as a result of what he called cartographic modernisationn during the last decade of the Qing dynasty, i.e.-. "efore that, he argues, although China has a long history of using maps, ancient Chinese maps did not demarcate China and its neighbours as bordered geo-entities. In the ancient world of China, border demarcation was occasionally practiced but was not institutionalised, for systematic border demarcation would have contradicted the universalistic ideology

of all under heavenn and misrepresented the political reality of Chinaas shifting frontiers ibid... His theory, insightful as it is, in fact resonates with the recent movement in social science theorisation about borders, and some popular Chinese views on borders.