Drawing on three bodies of literature-on memory and history, on the politics of memory in relation to ethnic or nationalistic claims, and on kinship as relatedness-Carsten sets about to study how, cumulatively and over time, small everyday processes of relatedness-such as narrating stories of past kinship, tracing family histories, constituting small ceremonies of commemorationshave a large-scale political import ibid... The book is mostly concerned with how the haunting memories of disrupted relations and critical events might define patterns of relatedness in the present-a point perfectly illustrated in a Mongolian context by Rebecca Empson , who shows with her contribution in the same volume how memories of exiled, deceased, or simply distanced relatives among the Buryat Mongols are embodied in material objects within the domestic space, a relationship with them being thus sustained in spite of their absence.

The argument presented here also envisages the connection between memory, patterns of relations, and their political context. It does so with this slight difference, however, that it takes relationship with foreigners, rather than kinship, as its main object of study. Adopting a technological approach to border studies see introductionn, this chapter explores the subtle and complex interconnections between collective memories, relations with foreign neighbours (the closest strangers, the furthest neighbours), as well as the historical and political context in which they are imagined to take place. In this perspective, memories of Russian presence and Chinese ghosts springing up from the past could be seen as elements of a border technology that, although not located right in the border zone, is attached to particular places on Mongolian territory, and defines contrasted styles of relationships with immediate neighbours. I will argue that a crucial role is played here by the materiality of foreign presence in Mongoliaa while Russians Oros) are praised for leaving visible, even conspicuous traces of their presence, Chinese peoplee Hyatad, derogatory Hujaa) are despised for burying everything underground.

A brief history of Mardai

Uranium exploration started after World War II in Mongolia, when several uranium deposits were found between and. From to , a bilateral agreement was signed, allowing the Ministry of Geology of the USSR to lead a geological reconnaissance expedition in Mongolia to inventory its mineral resources. Seventy percent of Mongolian territory was surveyed, and four metallogenetic provinces were identified, one of which was the Mongol Priargun in the eastern part of the country (Nuclear Energy "gency. In , an uranium ore deposit was found near the Mardai river. A secret agreement was subsequently signed, allowing the Soviet government to proceed with its exploitation on Mongolian territory Mays . In , a mine was established in Mardai, together with all supporting infrastructuree it was called Erdes and was created as a sub-combinee (subkombinat) of Priargunsky Mining and Chemical Works, itself a division of the Soviet Ministry of Atomic Energy. The main combine (kombinat), of which Erdes was a sub-section, was located in Krasnokamensk (ibid.). The uranium extracted in Mardai was shipped directly to Krasnokamensk, where it was processed. To this end, a railway line was built that linked the two mining towns across the border. None of these, however, neither the railway nor the town, appeared on maps at that time and until quite recently.

Uranium production began in , ironically less than a year before the existence of Mardai was made public. However, the extraction continued until , providing around ,,,, tons of ore a year, amounting to approximately 100 tons of uranium after refining (Nuclear Energy Agency  .

By that date, the settlement had gradually developed into a fully-fledged Russian town (, populated with workers coming from all over the Soviet Union, including from the nearby Buryat Autonomous Republic. Interestingly, the secrecy of Mardai and its very restrictive access policy created a strict division within the "uryat ethnic category "uryats from the Buryat Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, who usually spoke only Russian, were entitled to live in the town from the outset, fully benefiting from its goods, while Buryats living in Dornod province around Mardai, who often spoke both Mongolian and Russian, were excluded.

The town was obviously far better equipped than any Mongolian city of the time. Like any other Soviet town the streets were lined with trees and a social club was located right in the city centreFormer residents hailing from the Soviet Union also remember the impressive array of goods sold in shops, some of which were not even available back in their hometown (http://www.maxpey.narod.ru/mongol.html). There was also a kindergarten, a school complete with all facilities, a football and even a hockey ground, where championships were organised in summer and in winter respectively (ibid.). It is reported that at some point a cantilevered wheel was even erected, on which the city and its surroundings could be observed from above (Shimamura, personal communication).

Buryat families who used to live in nearby towns such as Dashbalbar in the north-began to settle around the city. According to former residents, by , when the uranium production stopped, about households lived in a separate district. After three years of uncertainty concerning the future of the mine and various attempts to restart production, Russian workers were given leave in , and returned home.