. His books began to be published in the s and are still immensely popular. 񮽙 Like the earlier Eurasianists, Gumilev also emphasised the naturall determinism of continental geography. Abandoning the previous emphasis on Christianity, Gumilev extolled the strength of the great steppe empires that flourished achieved passionary vigourr on the basis of their fitness with particular ecological-historical-geographical conjunctions.

Contemporary Neo-Eurasianism, whose most noted leader is Aleksandr Dugin, has taken these basic ideas, re-infused them with Russian nationalism and Orthodox Christian messianism, 񮽙 and extrapolated them into contemporary global conditions. Dugin writes that Russia is God-chosen and destined (obrechena) to become the leader of a new In , at the conference at "igun, Russia acquired the territory on the north bank of the "mur, and at the Treaty of Peking, signed in November , exclusive rights over previously jointly held territory from the Ussuri east to the ocean "assin . "n indication of Gumilevvs popularity among Central "sian leaders is that the Kazakh president Nursultan Nazarbaev ordered the L. N. Gumilev Eurasian University to be built opposite his palace in the new capital, Astana. Neo-Eurasians have resurrected the idea that Russia is the Third Romee, or successor to the Roman and "yzantine empiresplanetary (Eurasian) alternative to the Western version of global relations: unipolar globalism Dugin see also "assin. The idea of

Empire (Imperiya is central to Eurasia and the Russian people who in their essence are the empire-building process, the willful geo-political factor in creating the State of the "bsolute Ideaa Dugin-. Duginns geo-political vision, Bassin argues, diverges from the prewar versions of Eurasianism, since its principle is opposition to the global project of the United States after the Cold War. One of its early, more extreme, forms envisages a burst to the South, i.e. beyond the former Soviet borders, to assure the natural-historical line of development and preservation of the territorial integrity of Russiaa Zhirinovskii blurb, while Dugin has rhetorically sought to rally the brotherly people of the Eurasian landed continent struggling against the hegemony of the sea-born hegemony of the "tlantic powers Dugin-. Neo-Eurasianism must be seen as a strategic response to the post-Soviet political environment "assin 񮽙񮽙񮽙-.

At the same time, there are strains in Neo-Eurasianism that return to certain themes of the nineteenth century: the civilising mission, the organic harmony that melds together the diverse peoples of Russia, the anti-mercantilism, the idea that Russia must flourish in a different, spiritually pure way. Such views have influential contemporary proponents, such as Mikhail Titarenko, director of the Institute of Far Eastern Studies, who writes that Eurasianism espouses the principles of collectiveness (sobornost'), interdependence, mutual aid, co-operation of individuals and peoples, dialogue based on equal rights, of co-development, of harmony and of mutual complementarities in the relations between the civilisations and peoples of Russia, with a united common historic destiny Titarenko . This vision is implicitly opposed to the rationalist, competitive, individualistic zone of the West and its eastern flank is bounded by the discursive void of the other zone that is alien, China. 񮽙 It is not difficult to see, at a very basic level, why such a doctrine must assign great-but one-sided-importance to borders. If geography is the fate of Russiaa Dugin , if Eurasiaa is defined first of all by what it is not that is not the West and not "siaaa and it is conceived as a unitary, autarchic civilisation, then its external contours are constitutional I have been unable to find a reference to China in the pages of Duginns volume outlining his geo-political strategy except as an un-named zone of strategic interest to both the Eurasian and thein what Eurasiaa is. Let us now, however, look at some Russian critiques of the idea to gain some further insights into how borders are conceived in a broader civilisational analysis.

Russia as a "border civilisation"

Accepting Russia's interstitial Eurasian position, though not the Eurasianist doctrine, some writers have argued that the whole of Russia is a border (pogranichnyi type of civilisation Shemyakin and Shemyakina. Such a civilisation, balancing itself between alien barbaric others, manifests the restlessness of borders. Being defined primarily by the in-betweenness of its position, it accords priority to natural conditions and to maintaining the wide spaces of its realm. Because of its interstitial character, this civilisation has a constant tendency to extend, to overstep the mark, or more generally to excess. Consisting internally of countless varied elements, a border civilizationn is its own world, but one that is intrinsically heterogeneous and allows a greater role to chaos than other kinds of polity. The influential conservative thinker Il'in has indeed written that Russia is a whole cosmos-and not just a cosmos but also chaos-a chaocosmos .

In such an imaginary, there is no monolithic culture that penetrates throughout the entirety of society. Rather, as Shemyakin and Shemyakina write, the principle of border civilisation is multiplicity and the coexistence of different ways of resolving existential problems. Nevertheless, despite the lack of a monolithic culture or stylistic unity, Russia-albeit from different standpoints-has always seen a search for absolute good. The content of transcendental ideals may have changed through history, but the tendency to value them extraordinarily highly and to attempt to put them into practice in daily life is a constant. This has resulted in repeated attempts to broaden the sphere of the sacred and to impose liturgical time on events. With this attitude comes a corresponding lack of attention to the profane sphere of Russian life-. The rest of the world, not partaking of the same holy goals, is seen as antagonistic, and self-defence against external materiality-profanity is therefore a constant preoccupation-. "s this chapter will show, the notion of sacred space was to become important on the Russian-Chinese border. Russia is not only itself a border civilisationn but also has its own frontiers, where the chaotic combination of restlessness, expansion and defensiveness appears even more strongly. Shemyakin and Shemyakina point to the contradictions this has engendered, for example in the case of the Cossacks-. Initially made up of rebels and runaways, they were held to manifest the ancient Russian sacred values of wilful liberty (volya), autonomy, and freedom without limits. It was Cossacks who launched the initial forays into Siberia and later into Manchurian lands. Indeed, they became crucially important frontiersmen along most of Russia's most precarious borders. As soon as the border with China was demarcated they established landed settlements and communities along the frontier and became its guards. From having initially set out as barely controllable freebooters, they transformed, symbolically and in practice, into a closed hereditary estate and one of the most reliable supports of the autocratic state-a point to which I shall return.