Once emptied of its inhabitants, the city became available for a completely different purpose: as the iron was removed by Mongols settlers and sold at the border to Chinese wholesale dealers, it became a stockpile of saleable parts. Ironically, the mining town itself suddenly transformed into a mine. Everything was removed: all metallic items of course, but also the iron components in buildings, leaving them standing without structure, as well as the metallic framework of the roads Figs. and. Pipes were extracted from the ground for the lead they contained and wires were pulled out for their copper.

After the Russian population left, only a few households specialised in iron removal remained in Mardai, occupying more central places in the town, while the rest of the households moved out. Today, a dozen households still live there, often on a seasonal basis, and continue collecting iron to sell it across the Chinese border Figs. and. "ccording to the people interviewed on site, they trade the iron they collect to brokers who then resell it to Chinese buyers, making quite significant profits in the process. Rumour has it that some very wealthy people made their fortune this way at the end of the s. The Mongolian state itself took on some scraping of its own, notably availing itself of railway tracks around Mardai to be reused for its own network.

Memories of Mardai-a forbidden island of modernity

Mongolian people who have known Mardai before its destruction remember it with great excitement, almost enthusiasm. This excitement, in part, comes from the fact that the city had been inaccessible for so long, and that it was brought down to ruins as soon as it became open to the public. This has allowed Mardai to remain some kind of a legend, mostly known by hearsay and clad with the prestige of lost Soviet grandeur; people's memories, intertwined with fantasies, single out Mardai as an archetype of Socialist modernity. How do people go about remembering something they have never seen? asked Morten Pedersen upon considering narratives of Buddhist temples in Mongolia's northern Darhad region. Following Lars Højer , Pedersen emphasised the peculiar enhancement of occult agency that sometimes grows out of having incurred a religious loss . He described how the leveling of almost every monastery in the Darhad region spurred people's imagination about the extent and power of Darhad Buddhism. Focusing on the fate of one single artefact, a golden Tara statue extracted from a monastery before it was destroyed during the purges of the s, Pedersen described the legends that flourished in relation to it. The statue, a condensation of Darhad "uddhism is now the material anchor point of a virtual templee that people carry in their mind ibid.. .

As we will see, the ruins of Mardai could be said to achieve the same kind of effect: a condensation of Socialist ideology and Soviet way of life, they form the material basis of a virtual temple to modernity. What follows confirms what emerges from Pedersen's material, and what has been proposed by anthropologists working on mnemonic techniques (e.g. Severi it is not so much absence that stimulates recollection as the salience 2 of the last remaining item. The last remnant spurs imagination and memory, irresistibly filling the void and conjuring up an invisible framework within which the isolated vestige starts making sense again. When I went to visit Mardai on a day trip in summer , I was lucky enough to meet Tögsöö. Now in his thirties, he was a teenager when the town partially opened in the beginning of the s. He often visited his brother, who had settled there with his family, and worked with him during the summer in small jobs related to the Russian population of the town selling milk to them, for examplee. "fter , when the Russians left, he took an active part in the iron trade.

that took them to work. 3 Behind these high-rises, Tögsöö pointed out the kindergarten, which was several floors high; parts of the flowered wallpaper were still visible on the walls in the ruined buildingsA little further, blue tiles still covering a half-destroyed wall testified to the presence of a swimming pool only a few years earlier-something hard to believe in the middle of the arid Mongolian steppeBy pointing out details that revealed what was before, Tögsöö transfigured the ruins, helping us picture the lives of people who had lived there, and appreciate how impressive these infrastructures must have appeared in the middle of the plain. At some distance from the town, Tögsöö pointed out a space that looked empty, explaining that it had been the location of a large airfield capable of accommodating planes that would not be able to land in the capital city Ulaanbaatar's airport today. Now it was nothing but dust, barely distinguishable from the rest of the steppe. What was striking in Tögsöö's memories was their precision, and the obvious fact that he cultivated them. These ruins were associated with very vivid recollections of the past, which he let out for us eagerly, almost proudly, for several hours. Throughout our visit to the town, he celebrated it as an island of modernity, unsurpassed in the richness of its infrastructures, even by present-day Ulaanbaatar.

It is not unusual to find among the Mongolian population today such expressions of nostalgia for the communist period in general and for Russian presence in particular.  However, Mardai was not really remembered with nostalgia by people I interviewed. Nostalgia is a feeling for something which has been lost, and Mardai was never really Mongolian: until the end, indeed until its destruction, Mardai was a Russian town, whose wonders were strictly reserved to Russian usage-with the exception, as already mentioned, of Party leaders. Moreover, Mardai was not only associated with modernity, but also with the danger of uranium: rumours still circulate today about livestock born with malformations because of contaminated grass. Also present in people's mind was the more immediate danger of being shot if one ventured too close to the city: as Uradyn Bulag reported , no bird could fly over Mardaii. Therefore, the feeling associated with Mardai today is less nostalgia, as other traces of Russian occupation often inspire, than fear, or excitement mingled with fear, that is awe. As an area restricted to Russian population located far behind the borderline, Mardai could be seen as some kind of a proxy for the border Even, crucially, coming from the younger generation who has not known this period from first-hand experience Legrain once again, how do people go about remembering something they have never seen?