This, I suggest, has an important resonance for the ways in which speakers conceptualise the border and it may help understand the customary visualisation by Russians of the border as a national and ethnic fault line susceptible to be crossed and requiring protection  (see Humphrey, this volume), while the Chinese imagine it as a more supple zone, at times rich in opportunities, at other times as regions of danger.

The formation of the Chinese state has often been described as a process of gradual expansion outwards, slowly incorporating lands on its margins Fairbank , Tu in a process of Sinicisation or cooking of surrounding barbarian groups Fiskesjö. From a cultural centre located in the North China Plain, China is perceived to exist at the centre of an ever-widening series of concentric borderlands Potter. The centre, or coree, noted Sinologist Owen Lattimore-, was known as central plainn zhongyuan  or inner Chinaa neidi ) and referred to the densely populated, ethnic Han region running from north to south along the coast. The periphery, also known as frontiers bianjiang  or outer Chinaa waidi ), enveloped this Han heartland to the north, west, and southwest.

While the process of Sinicisation is somewhat problematic since it assumes a unidirectional transformation and assimilation (Crossley, Siu and Sutton "illé , what interests me here is the assumed survival of this model. In fact, a large share of anxieties about China gravitates precisely around this idea, namely that China continues to perceive itself as a cultural centre radiating outwards, and that formal demarcation (and resolution) of her national borders continues to exist in parallel with an ever-advancing cultural front.

Earlier, I defined borders as the territorial limits of a nation state and frontiers as the process of expansion of a political entity. Ethnographic data from various parts of the world, like South-East "sia Carsten or Europe Wilson and Donnan-suggest that nations were defined historically by their centres and that they articulated on ties of fealty between persons, not on the unambiguous mapping out of spacee Carsten. It is only later, as nations expanded and unclaimed lands shrank, that attempts were made to resolve these difficulties by delimiting a precise boundary Prescott. 10 From a people-based understanding, what was then witnessed was a gradual territorialisationn of the state Sahlins , i.e. a decline in relationships-inflected views of the nation and a progressive isomorphic identification between the physical and cultural extent of the state.

Traditionally, China's views of her borderlands were predominantly negative: borderlands were places of banishment as well as spaces generating cycles of crisis and catastrophe Woodside-. "ut if these territories formally included within the nation were seen, and frequently continue to be seen, as not quite Chinese and peopled by nonHan groups, the misalignment between political boundaries and cultural frontiers also has a formative impact on common perceptions of territories lying outside the current borders of the PRC. Regions such as Mongolia or parts of the Russian Far East, notably the Maritime region (Primorskii Krai), are not considered Chinese yet remain perceived as somewhat less foreign (Billé 2012).Frequently described by Chinese nationalists as regions that have broken away see Zhang-, these are liminal regions, not currently under Chinese control but with strong cultural and historic ties to China see Nelson .

Given China's use of history as a dominant state narrative and its routine insistence on being the country with the longest unbroken existence, historical and archaeological claims suggesting that these outlying regions were previously Chinesee in a national rather than ethnic sense) are frequently understood as territorial claims.Russians living in the Russian Far East have often perceived the Chinese presence as a political and strategic phenomenon rather than a social, economic or cultural one Larin. Hostile intent is also frequently ascribed to the existence of Chinese names to refer to local (Russian) cities "lexseev. Traditionally the Chinese name for Vladivostok was Haishenwei , Khabarovsk was called Boli , and Ussuriisk was known as Shuangchengzi . While these locales tend today to be referred to by their Russian names, i.e. Fuladiwosituoke, Habaluofisike and Wusulisike, these transliterations have not wholly displaced former names. "s historian James Stephan noted, in the s, Soviet archaeologists and historians were careful to cleanse the territories included within the Russian borders from Chinese historic presence by renaming over a thousand locales.

The attempt by Soviet, and later Russian, government to draw a sharp separation from China and to remove all ambiguity from the border hasThe fact that, during the Ming dynasty, titles were bestowed upon tribal units as far north as the Uda River and the shore of the Sea of Okhotsk Waldron has provided a historical rationale in China for considering vast expanses of Siberia as historically Chinesee.

12 There also tends to be some confusion between the claims of the PRC and those of the nationalist government in Taiwan, the latter indeed laying claim to Outer Mongolia, Tuva and some parts of the Russian Far East.

also left its traces on the physical landscape. As is clearly visible on aerial and satellite pictures of the border (see map of the Manzhouli/ Zabaikalsk border crossing, "ppendix II , the Russian state border is paralleled by additional markings and lines of defence, reinforcing further this sense of separation. Specifically, two kinds of demarcation are seen at this particular point: a no-man's land (dublirovanie pogranichnoi polosy) that frequently includes ploughed out strips and which, at some points along the border, may extend to widths of several miles; and a zone of fortification (ukreplennye rayony), which typically includes obstructions and/or minefields. 13 Also visible on aerial photographs is the so-called Chingis Khan's Northern Walll Severny Val ChingisKhanaa, a-mile long demarcation line established by Jurchen rulers during the Jin dynasty-in the first and unsuccessful attempt to insulate themselves from the Tatar and Mongolian tribes to the north Logvinchuk. Today, this line has become a relict boundary, defined by Prescott as a boundary that has been abandoned but endures through the differences in the landscape that have developed during its lifetime.