

). In July, the city's central square welcomes several fairground stalls and Chinese open-air dances are organised on weekend nights in nearby parks and squares. One evening, as the cross-border drivers were playing cards, they did not hear the Chinese army's concert playing on the central square facing them. They spend little money and do not fully participate in the city's life and economy. They are like ghosts, haunting the city during the day, looking for customers to drive across the border or for goods to transport for Mongolian businessmen based in Ulaanbaatar. Cross-border drivers exist almost in an inter-world of itinerant trade.

Since 2000, when cross-border relationships were officially and administratively organised (see Lacaze 2010), the number of cross-border drivers has been increasing every year. They numbered in and in 2010,and originated mostly from the southern aimag provinces of Mongolia (Dundgov', Dornogov', Ömnögov' and Bayanhongor), which are close to the border or in the vicinity of the railway line. 񮽙񮽙 Mongolian cross-border drivers own their jeeps. They earn on average ,,,,,,,, Tg [$$,,,,] per month, for a am to pm work day, seven days a week, usually without any day off, except when the Chinese or Mongolian section ofThis information was given to me by the drivers themselves as well as by other Ereen residents. It is not readily available in official sources but is nevertheless included in internall reports of the Mongolian diplomatic or customs services, as well as in the documents of a few bilateral administrations. These reports are not easily available but all Ereen residents know their content. 񮽙񮽙 The drivers hold special passports allowing them to cross the border several times a day. the border is closed. 񮽙񮽙 Drivers decide for themselves whether to work or not, and will regularly take a break for a few days. In 2010, among the Mongolian people living in Ereen, cross-border drivers were the largest category of migrants, paralleling the number of Mongolian women working as prostitutes.

Of their own free will?

One of the main visible transformations of Ereen has been the growth of activities related to body caree and the sex industry. Indeed, these activities concern, in particular, beauty institutes, hairdressers, massage parlours and sex shops. These places are specifically devoted to people who work in the sex industry and need special body care daily. The city's sex industry includes people working as striptease artists, call girls, hostesses or prostitutes. The majority of them are women although, since , a few

Chinese men have started to work as transsexual prostitutes in the city's bars and nightclubs.

On the city map of Ereen in , a few brothels were grouped within three enclosed quarters the streets called Kolomby Colombiaaa and Shin Tian Men, and at the back of the circular shop buduun delgüür). 񮽙񮽙 Many prostitutes also worked in several hotels with special public baths (usually saunas) and in the massage parlours disseminated throughout the city. At that time, no sex shop existed and condoms were sold in pharmacies. "ccording to several Chinese and Mongolian Ereen residents, in around 300 Mongolian women worked officially as prostitutes in Ereen. The same sources claim that Mongolian women numbered in. In addition, Chinese women and Inner Mongolian women also worked in the city. The number of prostitutes who have emigrated from Mongolia has doubled over the last three years. Its growth corresponds to an increase in sexual demand, coming predominantly from Chinese citizens, industrialists or managers, and from Mongolian citizens, mostly drivers and wholesalers who are alone and with cash to spend when they stay in Ereen.

In Ereen, sex industry customers belong to different sexual cultures-Russified Mongols, Sinicised Mongols and Chinese-that consider prostitution as a normall phenomenon or usuall service for men seeking sexual satisfaction. Prostitution fully partakes in the Chinese sexual cultureee besides concubines, prostitutes play an important role in Chinese masculine sociality Micollier. It does not have the same place in Mongolian or Russian culture, even if they both largely accept extramarital sexual relationships.

In 2010, Shin Tian Men disappeared from the Ereen map. The several brothels that were located at the beginning of that street moved to 񮽙񮽙 Shin Tian Men is likely to be a Mongolian rendering of the Chinese Xinjiang Men

Xinjiang door.

another street, built in , called Jin Cho. The number of brothels then increased rapidly. By 2010, Jin Cho was a cul-de-sac with around sixty brothels, all numbered, one next to the other. In each red light housee or brothel, five to fifteen Mongolian women work as prostitutes. Jin Cho specialises in the higher scale of prostitution activities: the women who work there are under thirty and conform to the local standards of beauty, meaning they are thin, elegant and have white skin