Eurasianist support among dispersed domestic audiences (electorates), while eschewing them in international arenas, is relevant.If we are to look for where in Russian society the more strident versions of Eurasianism are popular, it seems that two locales are especially prominent: first among the military and security apparatuses Rangsimaporn , and secondly among Asian minority intellectuals). The former may be concerned with Russia's Great Power status and the latter with something quite different, enhanced attention to non-Russian nationalities and the promise of harmonious relations. But in either case, these two very different social constituencies relate to borders, since both of these social groups are key actors in frontier zones.

With the end of the Cold War and the healing of the Sino-Soviet split, the frontier with China has ceased to be a place of overt confrontation. On political and national security issues Russian relations with China seem excellent. Leaders meet congenially, and in July 2001 Presidents Jiang Zemin and Vladimir Putin signed a joint statement of friendship and cooperation over a wide range of issues. The treaty included recognition of the legitimacy of current borders and ratification of earlier reductions

Rangsimaporn points out that different nuances in the meaning of Eurasianism are reflected in Russian vocabulary. The pragmatic, factual sense is employed in official communications, using Evroaziatskaya to describe the country, while Evraziiskaya is employed by Neo-Eurasianists and by some of the civilization analysts .

10 For example, Putin publicly praised Gumilev at the celebration of the city of Kazan's one thousandth anniversary in Shlapentokh .

on troop numbers at the frontier. Through the relatively small number of crossing points, massive trade now flows in either direction:-. Today, Russian and Chinese border guards carry out joint training exercises to combat terrorist incursions, illegal migration, gun and drug running, smuggling and poaching. Nevertheless, the Russian side of the border is still massively securitised. Adjacent to the border itself, and along its length, there is a restricted zone, to which access is limited to citizens having special passes issued by the Federal Security Service (FSB). This strip has varied in breadth through the years, sometimes limited to km, but sometimes and in some places expanded to include villages and well-used roads. The Border Guard Service argues for it to be widened, local inhabitants object to the inconvenience.It is along this strip of land, which is on the one hand managed centrally from the border directorate of the FSB in Moscow and on the other subject to all kinds of local practice and interventions that ideologies lay their hand, and the complex relation between the centre and the periphery becomes evident. The view of Russia as a civilisation extending its order to the brink of the wild terrain of the other appears, for example, in the outputs of the contemporary border guards (who belong to a Federal institution and are not necessarily local people). For example, posted on YouTube is a video that seems to be a home-made effort by the border guards: starting with an image of a frontier post against a mountain sunset, with the title The Russian border is sacred and inviolablee, it proceeds to a guards song along with scenes of resolute military-type activity in barren landscapes. The songs repeated refrain is The border strip eternally was and will bee and the verses frequently evoke the longing to return home to Russiaa-as though this home is indeed a civilization away from these wild parts.Inside and near to the restricted zone are many Cossack settlements, formerly the stations stanitsa) of the Transbaikal, Chita, Amur and Ussuriisk regiments. In , the Cossack population of the Transbaikal Cossack Host numbered ,,,, people, ,,,, of which served in the military.

During the Soviet period, the Cossacks were disbanded and repressed-for many of them had opposed the communists during the Civil War-and their border guard duties were taken over by the NKVD, later KGB-FSB. However, in post-Soviet times, Yeltsin encouraged the revival of the Cossacks and a brotherhood zemyachestvo) was formed among the some .. million self-proclaimed Cossacks scattered in across the border regions of the Russian Federation Galeotti-. In the turbulent s, Russiaas leaders turned to the Cossacks for internal and external security, permitting local administrations to hire them as vigilantes and the FSB to recruit them alongside the border guards and customs officials in frontier duties Davis .Today, Cossacks, many of whom are still part-time soldiers, patrol the border areas close to their villages. In , a conference organised by the FS" in Ulan-Ude called on the rights and duties of local militias, patrols and Cossack units to be enhanced and regularised. All of this indicates recognition by the state of the need to involve the inhabitants of the frontier region not only in making the border secure but also in participating in the work of the state. "s the FS" official stated at the conference, We need to carry out wide explanatory work among the local population and return to the principle, the border defends the whole peoplee. 

The Cossacks have become a significant paramilitary, but also social and cultural, force along the Russian border with China, and they are particularly relevant to this paper for two reasons. First, they see Cossack rejuvenation as an integral part of the overall rejuvenation of Russia and they strongly support the state and the territorial integrity of Russia Skinner .