"uriad migrants in exile used traditional technique of creating home at the new place, a technique based on long existing pastoralist tradition and practice of regular migrations between seasonal pastures. One could even suggest that for Buriads migration to Mongolia was not exile, that it was just an extension of their orbital trajectory, especially since Aga Buriads previously used to move within large tracks of land in extensive nomadic pastoralism. Indeed, some of them living near the border with Mongolia used to cross it and temporarily camp on the other side at summer pastures, but they were always free to return for winter residence. The tragedy of Buriad migration and what actually constitutes this group as a diaspora, to my mind, appears to be in people's emotions and feelings about the sudden traumatic separation from their families and close kin, when strictly sealed state borders extinguished the hope of returning to nutag, toonto nutag and other worshiping places on the other side of the border.

Political upheavals in the region and Soviet-style campaigns of persecuting counter-revolutionary elements both in Russia and in the host countries (China, Mongolia) made this group of people feel unwelcome everywhere. The people in the diaspora attempt to explain the sense of catastrophic deprivation by saying Losing the homeland, we lost everything (nutaga aldaad bükhiigöö aldabdi). The feeling that they had crossed the borderlinee of normal life and have to survive in a strange apocalyptical world was formulated in a self-reflective explanation: life in exile in khari nutag was not a real life. Rather, it was a strange existence in an inverted world where, as in a cracked mirror, everything went in the wrong way and all engagements with the world and objects were not correct. In diaspora tales, life in exile is described as life on the wrong sidee (buruu tala and done in a wrong way buruu): as if they milk cows from the wrong sidee or saddle and mount horses also from the wrong sidee.

Through decades and lines of separation: practice of legal, illegal and imagined border crossing

Techniques of border crossing mean not only going away but also coming back, like the nomadising that used to be practiced in the frontier area.

Despite state policies to divide and to control land and people, local inhabitants-especially if they belong to an ethnic group separated by state borders-generate local knowledge and cultural practices of how to keep borders openn and how to go through this slightly complicated door. In this section I will describe how Buriad migrants challenged strictly sealed Russian-Chinese and Russian-Mongolian border to visit their kin on other side. It is mostly based on oral histories of separated families, and it shows how they see acts of border crossing both as it was done physically (legally or illegally from the point of view of official border crossing regime) and in an imaginary way, via occasional messengers who could bring oral messages, short letters, pictures, little gifts and even spiritual messages received through special shamanic rituals. Oral histories present different stories of migration, depending on the time, locality and other circumstances of the flight. Some groups of families prepared their migration well. Firstly they sent rangers (türüüchul) to search for suitable and under-populated pastures across the border. They managed to take the livestock bit by bit and to send some men of the family to prepare encampments for arrival of the rest of the family, elders, children and other belongings. Other families fled in a hurry, saving their lives from mass red-terror execution and not able to take anything with them. One elder describes her childhood memories, how she and her parents passed by the emptied neighboring village of Tokchin:

Everything was disemboweled (zadarkhai), empty houses, unfastened doors and gates, wooden chests (khanza) thrown away empty (angarkhai), family belongings thrown everywhere and cattle unattended. It was very frightening (aya güi to be there Dolgor, years, Uzon, Russia, .

Groups of mobile armed horsemen were able to cross border regularly, hiding from the border patrols, whose service was disorganised during the civil war in the s. When border control tightened in the s, open crossing became impossible, but still courageous peoplee berkheshuul)

continued to cross the border through secret mountain and forest passes at night to visit their families. Some locals in Suduntui used to joke that the wife of their neighbor, who fled to Mongolia during the civil war, continued to give birth to children until the moment her husband was caught and killed by a border patrol. Families were separated in different ways. Manlai explained an episode of separation from her husband's family,

My father-in-law was a rich man from Borzya. After he moved to Shenehen he came back several times to carry his family over the border. But I was the only daughter of my parents and refused to move away following my in-laws (khadam). Who could take care of my parents if I left them? Father-in-law came at night and cursed me loudly because I again refused to join him. Later I heard that he was caught by the GPU  and died in prison. I was also locked in prison because they thought that I kept contacts with my in-laws and other bodkhul (those who resisted and fled) people. But I was from a poor family, and our neighbor Dugar, who worked for Communists, helped me to escape the punishment. Soon I got married again. In the s I went to Shenehen to visit my other relatives and saw there my former in-laws. They still blame me for the death of their fatherManlai, years old, Suduntui, Russia, Almost all Buriad families along both sides of the border experienced human tragedies. Numa was left with her grandparents when she was only two years old. Her parents settled in Bayan-Uul and later wanted to bring her there, but she was a sickly child and the grandparents preferred to keep her with them. Once, when Numa became dangerously sick, the shaman explained that the child's spirit regularly flies away to see her mother, who missed her so much that the spirit might leave Numa's exhausted body to be reborn again in the parents' family. As Numa explains the situation now, the shaman turned into an animal (amitan) and ran over the border to pass her mother a message that she should not miss her daughter so much, and that other children would be born to their family soon. Numa remembers that from time to time her parents sent her occasional gifts, like pieces of pressed sugar cane, with messengers: