Grégory Delaplace is a social anthropologist, working as a lecturer at the Université Paris Ouest Nanterre. His most recent research concerned the political dimension of the invisible in Mongolia today (or the invisible dimension of politics), whereby ghosts, or spirits, are led to play a role in the postsocialist nation building process. His publications include L'invention des morts. Sépultures, fantômes et photographie en Mongolie contemporaine , and Parasitic Chinese, Vengeful Russians: Strangers, Ghosts and Reciprocity in Mongolia. Grégory Delaplace can be contacted at gregory.delaplace@ mae.u-paris10.fr.

Caroline Humphrey is an anthropologist based at the University of Cambridge who has worked in Russia, Mongolia, China, India, Nepal and Ukraine. She has researched a wide range of themes including Soviet and post-Soviet provincial economy and society; Buryat and Daur shamanism; Jain religion and ritual; trade and barter in Nepal; environment and the pastoral economy in Mongolia and the history and contemporary situation of Buddhism, especially in Inner Mongolia. Her recent research has concerned urban transformations in post-Socialist cities. Caroline Humphrey can be contacted at chhhhhh@hermes.cam.ac.uk.

Valentin Sergeevich Batomunkuev is a researcher at Baikal Institute of Nature Management SB RAS, Laboratory of Nature Management Economics.

His current scientific work investigates the use of mineral resources, desertification and trans-boundary issues between Buryatia and Mongolia. Previously he carried out research on the management of subsurface resources and the development of transport crossing in the border territory between the two countries. He can be contacted at bvalentins@yandex.ru.

Uradyn E. BulagHe published widely on crossborder migrations in modern and late imperial Russia, on the role of ethnic migrations in the formation of settlers communities in the East of Russia and on the comparative study of diasporas. He can be contacted at dyatlov@irk.ru.

Gaëlle Lacaze is an assistant professor at the Department of Ethnology of the University of Strasbourg. Her research focuses on the anthropology of the body relating to Mongolian people and Turkic populations, including Kazakhs. Her current research investigates patterns of international migrations of Mongolian citizens. She is the author of Le corps mongol: techniques et conceptions nomades du corps , the editor of Migrations in Central Asia and Caucasus Revue europeenne des migrations internationales, 2010-13) and a number of articles in the field. She can be contacted at gaelle.lacaze@misha.fr.

Sayana Namsaraeva is a Research Associate in the Division of Social Anthropology,

and member of the Mongolia and Inner Asia Studies Unit, University of Cambridge. During her recent post-doctoral research at the Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology she conducted extensive fieldwork on border regions of the Russian, Chinese and Mongolian territories. Her current project focuses on local society that straddles the Sino-Russian border in the twin cities of Zabaikal'sk and Manzhouli. She has published a number of articles in Russian, English and Chinese languages and is currently working on her book on the Qing frontier administration in Inner Asia. She can be contacted at namsaraeva@gmail.com.

Ivan Peshkov is an assistant professor at the Institute of Eastern Studies at the Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznan, Poland. His current research focuses on the political dimension of quasi-indigenousness on the Russian-Chinese frontier. He has carried out research in the Chinese, Russian, and Mongolian border triangle and investigated the main economic and historical processes that characterize this area. He can be contacted at i.peshkov@wp.pl.

Natalia Ryzhova is the director of the Amur Laboratory for Economic and Social Studies at the Economic Research Institute of the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Science. She specialises in regional economics and economic sociology with particular focus on informal economics. In recent years she has focused on the interactions between Russian-Chinese frontier people, firms and authorities and on the issue of border openness in China.

She is a member of the Cambridge Mongolia and Inner Asia Studies Unit's Network for the study of the border zones between China, Russia and eastern Mongolia. Her publications include Trans-border Exchange between Russia and China: The Case of Blagoveshchensk and Heihe with G. Ioffe, The Case of the Twin City of Blagoveshensk-Heihe and The Political Economy of Trade Openness Reform: Consequences of Reform for). She can be contacted at n.p.ryzhova@gmail.com.