And these concerns do, indeed, appear to be widely exaggerated. Research carried out by local scholars suggests that prevalent fears are not supported by facts see "lexseev aa-. While Russian media assert that Chinese migrants routinely evade immigration restrictions and stay behind, data tell a different story. In Primorskii Krai in , only

Chinese failed to return home, i.e. a proportion amounting to 0.03 per cent of the total number of Chinese visiting the region that year. The following year, in , the number had dropped further, to people, i.e. ... per cent Larin. Instead of the tidal waves and invasions described in the Russian media see Dyatlov , the majority of the Chinese working in the Russian Far East typically stay for the duration of their contract and then return home. Indeed, surveys carried out among them indicate they do not consider the region an attractive prospect for long-term settlement Hill and Gaddy. For their part, Chinese scholars are careful to distinguish them from traditional migrants (yimin ) and sojourners (huaqiao ), preferring to refer to them as overseas workers (waipai laowu  instead Wishnick .

While demographic imbalance and socioeconomic factors go a long way to explain these sentiments, similar fears of Chinese expansion are also prevalent on Sakhalin Island, despite the presence of only a few hundred Chinese there Larin , 3 suggesting that the cause of these anxieties might be located elsewhere. In fact, the dangers thought to originate from China are largely associated with a phantasm of China pertaining to the realm of the imaginary, a would-be Chinaa as Lomanov has phrased it. Given that China is not making any territorial claim,  and is on the contrary trying to resolve outstanding issues, and given that despite fears of being overrun by the Chinese, actual numbers are hardly threatening (the total annual percentage of Chinese workers employed in the RFE has never exceeded 0.2 per cent of the total work force there,  Larin , the issue appears to be less one of actual socioeconomic threat than a misalignment between official statements and imagined intentionality.

This misalignment may be due, in part, to the different concepts of the border held by Russians and Chinese. Specifically, what does elicit Russian anxieties may be less a matter of aggressive and imperialistic designs on the part of China than her considerably more supple understanding of borders. "efore I go on to develop this argument, it may be useful to draw a brief comparison between the two sets of lexical resources available to Russian and Chinese speakers to refer to borders.

In modern Russian, the concept is expressed by two terms, largely synonymous: granitsa and rubezh. Granitsa is etymologically related to gran', meaning facet or edgee, while rubezh comes from rubit' (to cut, chop) and was previously synonymous with zarubka, meaning cut or notchh Shanskii and "obrova. The semantic fields delineated by the two terms show some similarity with the opposition found in English between border and frontier with granitsa indicating a linear demarcation and rubezh denoting a fuzzier differentiation between Self and Other. However, in most linguistic contexts rubezh appears to be losing ground in favour of granitsa.  In other words, a shift in the semantic landscape concerning borders, and specifically a linearisationn of the concept, is discernible in the lexical resources available to Russian speakers. This linearity is also visible in the adjectival forms of the term granitsa like pogranichny and prigranichny and particularly in words derived from both granitsa and rubezh, such as foreignn zagranichny and abroad za granitsei, za nationals "lexseev b . "lthough this is not China's official position, some Chinese groups do make such territorial claims. Since , changes in the calculation methods have increased this percentage to to % for the Amur oblast (Ryzhova, personal communication). The term rubezh is never used for instance to speak of an actual border with another nation. Its use is virtually limited to set expressions such as za rubezhom (abroad). rubezhom), with the preposition za (over, across) which clearly constructs the border as a line rather than a zone.

This makes for a stark contrast with modern Chinese where the lexical landscape referring to borders is much broader (see). The principal lexemes used to refer to borders are jiè (), jìng (), jing () and bin () and these are used in combination with each other as well as with other characters to form a wide array of words. While jiè and jìng unambiguously denote a linear concept of boundary and limit, jing and bin are more polysemic. On its own, jing can mean both boundary and dominionn (as in Xinjiang , literally new dominionnn. Similarly, bin translates in various ways depending on context. Its primary meaning is that of sidee, but it can also mean border, boundary, edgee or marginn when combined with another character (i.e. binjiè : territorial boundary; binjìng : border area; binjing : borderland, frontier; binmín  : frontiersman; binq : border region). Thus the lexical wealth of Chinese points to conceptualisations of the border that extend beyond a linear perspective and are significantly more zonal. While in Russian (like in French or German) no clear lexical distinction exists between the concepts of border and frontier, the numerous Chinese terms convey a range of images of a border-as a line, as a liminal zone, as a margin. 