to develop in the rest of this introduction, in order to give an overview of the volume's content.

The fuzzy materiality of the border First of all, and from a material point of view, a border is obviously made of far more elements than a door. It is a well established idea in the literature that a border is not just a line. Donnan and Wilson , for example, list three constitutive elements to a border: it is composed, according to them, of a juridical borderline which simultaneously separates and joins states, but also of the agents and institutions of the state, who demarcate and sustain the border as well as frontiers, territorial zones of varying widthh stretching away from the borderline itself. If several chapters in the present volume confirm the relevance of these three components to North Asian borders as well, some contributions also show that the materiality of the borderline-the infrastructure marking the juridical borderlinee-is itself composite.

A survey of the border crossing infrastructures between Russia and Mongolia, compiled by Valentin Batomunkuev, is presented in an appendix to this volume. In addition to the border checkpoints themselves, we see that the technological apparatus that ensures border control is made of custom buildings and warehouses, roads and a railway network surrounding and crossing the border, as well as various installations ensuring water and electricity supply. Robin Grayson and Chimed-Erdene "aatar , using satellite images available on Google Earth, had already inventoried the infrastructures that constituted the border between China and Mongolia. Grayson and Baatar showed that not only crossing points, but also the line of separation itself was of a composite nature: on the one hand, satellite images reveal a multitude of ancient border vestiges in the form of wall ruins, which leave in the landscape the mark of previous territorial delimitations (what Prescott, quoted in Franck "illé's chapter, called a relict boundary also, and more significantly, newly erected fences on the Chinese side are doubled with a large ploughed area, of to metres wide, running along the border with Mongolia over more than 1,300 kilometres.

The border, from a material point of view, resembles a double-door system more than a single one: rather than just a fence, it often takes the form of an assemblage of walls and spaces (the no man's land being only one type of border space), that constitutes a zone of separation between two different territories.  Yet, walls are not the only way by which the border zone is delimitated: the list of its constitutive elements also includes the regulations that frame the legal regime specific to the border area "illé, "atomunkuev. In chapter , Humphrey reveals that this strip of land is managed directly by the FSB, Russia's Federal Security Service, which regulates access to this zone.

Other material components in this border assemblage might be located at a distance from the actual borderline. Thus cities might be an essential factor in connecting or keeping apart neighbouring states: Manzhouli, located near the border between China and Russia, is as much part of the border device as the actual checkpoint, and more of a zone of encounter between the two sides than an instrument of demarcation (see Manzhouli city map in the appendix section).  In chapter , Gaëlle Lacaze looks at the city of Ereen, on the Chinese side of the border with Mongolia: comparable to a modern caravanserai, where Mongols stop and trade, the city is the place where cross-border relationships involving all sorts of business, including sex work, actually occur. Chapter 12 provides further examples of elements in the Mongolian border apparatus that are actually located outside of the frontier area: I show in this chapter that memories attached to material and immaterial vestiges of foreign presence in Mongolia-abandoned Russian towns, resilient Chinese ghosts-are used by Mongolian people to qualify and manage their relationship with their neighbours.

Finally, Uradyn Bulag, in chapter 3, reminds us that populations have often been deemed more efficient than walls to protect the border from unwanted intrusions. Thus the Qing dynasty, in China, has relied on the presence of the Mongols to protect their Northern confines from the expanding Russian empire. Likewise, entire ethnic groups have been put in charge of border control by centralised political formations: the Cossacks, famously, were tasked by the Tsar to guard the Russian border. Caroline Humphrey chapter describes the central place that the border continues to hold in contemporary Cossack identity: although no longer officially in charge of its defence, Cossacks continue to patrol the border and create rituals to celebrate their involvement in the protection of the integrity and the purity of Russian land.

Moreover, as was already noted by Weber for the "ustralian border, the borders between China, Russia and Mongolia often lack precise localisation: satellite images clearly show in certain places a succession of different lines of demarcations in space, none of which seem to be more prominent than the others. For a similar perspective, see Vila's ethnography of the cities of Juárez and El Paso, respectively on the Mexican and on the "merican side of the border Vila .

Material and immaterial components in border assemblages

Yet, clearly, border assemblages are not only composed of material elements.