

In Ereen, prostitution is mainly voluntary. 3 While this means that women are not forced to work as prostitutes, it does not mean that their work is entirely free of coercion either. Prostitution in Ereen is well organised and occurs through ger (brothels) that are officially registered as commercial establishments. They are concentrated in red light districts like in many other cities in China Pan. The increase of Ereen brothels between and reflects the global expansion of the city where the chanjuud's activities have grown rapidly in comparison with the naimaachin's. The several life stories I have gathered from prostitutes during summer 2010 underline the strategies developed by Mongolian women confronted with poverty, temporary economic difficulties or unfavourable relations of domination.

Methodology

I have used different ethnographic methods in the course of these periods of fieldwork. In , I followed several naimaachin in their trips on the railway and across the border, as well as in Ereen, Zamyn-üüd and Ulaanbaatar. I drew the naimaachin's walking figures de Certeau and shed light on the traders' significant places (see. For the second period of fieldwork, in , following Lilian Matthieu-, I focused my research on one placeee ger No. in a street called Jin Cho in Ereen. 񮽙

Compared to the collection of life stories or to the study of politics related to prostitution, this method allows the analysis of individuals' strategies in a marginal context while avoiding the stigmatising dynamics of marginality and shame associated with prostitution.

Over twenty days I established relationships with a dozen Mongolian women selling sex both inside and outside the brothel. I spent time with them in the afternoons, teaching them English before clients started coming to Jin Cho. During this fieldwork, I made the Jin Cho is likely to be the Mongolian rendering of the Chinese Jincheng Golden palaceee. conscious decision to avoid the point of view of customers and officials. I focused this ethnographic research on women from Mongolia because of the specific administrative processes managing the migrations of Chinese people.

I initially investigated processes of transformation of spaces in places, according to Michel de Certeau's theory , and later sought to understand the life, emotions and sentiments of Mongolian migrants settled in Ereen. During both periods of fieldwork I met Mongolian drivers who organise the crossing of the Sino-Mongolian border. Except for the naimaachin, I did not formally collect biographies. Even if people were willing to share their life stories with me, they would only offer some pieces, underscoring defining moments and avoiding others. Little by little, all the people I worked with shared some pieces of their life with me. Later, I tried to organise the various elements of these individual life stories. Indeed, I conducted some formal and classical fieldwork with naimaachin while, at the same time, collecting informal information with prostitutes. If these two phases of gathering ethnographic data are different, they also share some similarities, allowing for a comparison of the results emerging from both. These ethnographic methods allow a comparison that underlines the city's development from to. The analysis of the changes that have taken place in the organisation of the city illustrates its appropriation by Mongolian wholesalers and, in addition, the increase in temporary-permanent Mongolian migrants in Ereen. Ereen plays an important role for Mongols. By contrast, it is not as important for Chinese people even if many Chinese migrants come to the city, attracted by its wilder and warmer environment and somewhat less stressful life. In my study of Ereen I thus focused my research on Mongolian activities and representations.

Development of Ereen

The period between and saw vast development in the infrastructure of Ereen, and the appearance of several markets specialising in construction materials. The city's expansion is encouraged by the political agenda of both the Chinese and Mongolian governments, and by the industrial and economic interests of its Chinese residents.

In , Ereen was composed of different districts of various sizes, each of them specialised in a particular activity: residential areas, shops, markets, warehouses, etc. The city was comprised of almost ten districts, mainly located west of the railway (see

). 񮽙 At the centre of the city, the new market shine zah and the old market huuchin zah), as well as the window shop shilen/shiliin delgüür and the circular shop (buduun delgüür) were the main places for buying small manufactured products. In other words, they were places dedicated to Mongolian I drew this map while walking through the city. The map scale is quite approximate as it is mean as a tool to identify people' appropriation of places, the specialisation of the various town quarters, and the location of each activity.

retailers-naimaachin, who buy mostly shoes, clothes, furniture, mobile phones and other small digital devices. At the periphery of the city, surrounding these central places, many shops offered products intended for Mongolian wholesalers (chanjuud), such as construction materials, warehouses or freight infrastructures. Near these places for wholesalers were several residential buildings. Scattered all over Ereen were places for the Mongolian itinerant traders' daily life, such as hotels, bars, restaurants and public baths, as well as places for their entertainment (bars, nightclubs, gaming houses or brothels).