4. Concepts of "Russia" and their Relation to the Border with China

Tsarist Empire, the USSR, and the Russian Federation, has then impacted on how the border has been treated by the state.

The anthropology of borders has broadly taken two directions, either to emphasise the people living in frontier regions and moving across borders, or to focus on how borders are conceived as more or less powerful presences of the state see discussion in Radu-. " fruitful synthesis by

Peter Sahlins makes the point that the political boundaries imposed by states have to be actualised in practice by diverse local actors with their own various interests. He argued in the case of the border between France and Spain that the presence of politically-divided ethnic groups living across the boundary makes the problem of nation building all the more salient-and that in frontier zones of cultural bilingualism the process of creating French or Spanish citizens involves the agency of the people inhabiting frontier zones as well as central state projects.This perspective is particularly useful for former empires like Russia and China, which both have large and heterogeneous minority populations in frontier areas. This chapter will focus on one specific input in such processes, the role of national imagination-the changing conceptions of what Russia is as a civilisation-in the construction of the eastern border with China, and it attempts to explain thereby the ideological load on this border and its self-defining, other-excluding quality. I should be clear that this paper does not itself attempt to erect a model or ideal typee of Russia, 2 but rather to point to the main streams of Russian thought on this matter, particularly in the present day. They are relevant to political policy because countless Russian (and non-Russian) writers, officials and politicians have expounded on the theme normatively, i.e. with the intent of making interventions in political projects. Yet, as I shall suggest in line with Sahlins , the local interpretations of such ideas are currently at least as striking (if not more so) than those of the state centre.

The body of social thought that interprets Russia as a civilisation is not of course the only one in existence. Not just western but also many Russian commentators have rejected such an approach to understanding the country. For in this case civilisationn implies not just an assemblage of mobile traits that adhere over geographical space (as was proposed by Marcel Mauss in , but a cultural structure based on certain essential

The notion of cultural bilingualism comes from Yuri Lotman-quoted in ". J.values. There are plenty of critiques of contemporary attempts to prolong nineteenth-century debates about such an ideaa of Russia, exposing them as academically bankrupt, out-dated and ideologically isolationist e.g. Miller. "ut it is easy to see why, with the demise of the Soviet Union and consequent radical border changes, the question of what would constitute the unity of the resulting country would urgently present itself to its rulers-especially for generations used to there being such an idea in its Soviet version. They see that the global market economy into which Russia has plunged not only fails to provide such a notion but would tend to obscure it. Consequently, as Kaganskii has observed, there is a renewed demand for schemes and analogies for a great united state power . From an anthropological point of view, the normative character of such civilizational models is what makes them interesting. This chapter will first describe some historical and contemporary models of Russia as a civilisation, along with Russian critiques of them that nevertheless keep the discussion within the civilisation paradigm. The last section of the paper discusses the implications of such ideas at the Russo-China border itself.

Changing ideas of Russia as a Eurasian country

In the wake of the defeat in the Crimean war in Russian governmental elites rejected the earlier Petrine vision of Russia as an essentially European country and turned their attention toward its Asian hinterlands beyond the Urals. Even before this, Russia had been envisioned as having a manifest destiny, both to tame wild Siberian Nature and to civilise the stagnant "sian societies of the East. In the s, Russia was already described as having a particular mission among humanity… Russia is an entire Europe unto itself, a Europe that is intermediary between Europe and Asia, between Africa and America: a marvellous, unknown, and new country "alasoglo quoted in "assin. Such were the grandiloquent terms in which Russiaa was discussed, but at the same time strategic and practical opportunities beckoned. General Murav'ev's campaigns to the east were impelled on the one hand by fear that Russia's Far Eastern interests were threatened by the imperialist European moves into China, and on the other by a desire to join with them in appropriating Chinese spoils. He fashioned a grand plan to overturn the border agreed in the seventeenth century and move decisively into the Amur region, eventually annexing this weakly-controlled and under-populated area in and "assin-. 3 Not content with this success, military voices still spoke of a further expansion southwards into Manchuria. With explicit and warm reference made to the manifest destiny of the United States to push westwards, the sentiment was you will not hold back Russiaas universal destiny "assin , .

Such visions of Russia as rightfully present in Asia were not transformed into an explicit Eurasianist doctrine until the s. The émigré authors of the movement put forward the idea that Russia is not a European country, nor an "sian one, but is Eurasiaa, a separate civilisation located between the two. Russian nationalism was not distinct from, but aligned with, an imperial vision of the entire country. According to this theory, while the West was in decline, Russia, including its diverse native cultures, would experience an imminent rise and bear a civilising mission towards the East. The Eurasianists argued that the continent must develop its own independent, self-reliant, non-maritime economy; they believed that the Soviet Union could transform into this harmonious utopia, and that it was capable of evolving away from atheist and proletarian doctrines to become a national, Orthodox Christian country. A bridge between this movement, which had died away by the s, and the Neo-Eurasianism that is influential today, was the work of Lev Gumilev e.g. [[[