at strengthening accountability with respect to poaching. Thus, the Federal Law On the introduction of amendments to the Code of the Russian Federation concerning administrative violations has increased sanctions for violations of fishing regulations. In principle, amateur and sport fishing is free, but each angler must have the appropriate ticket, as well as the right to operate motor boats (if used). In recent years, this type of activity has become much more regulated. Thus, for instance, the Federal Fisheries Agency may (and should): impose bans on fishing in certain areas for certain species of fish, and even certain categories of citizens (fishing being allowed for example for children under years of age or pensioners older than close off some areas for certain periods (e.g. during spawning); limit the minimum/maximum dimensions and weight of fish caught; determine the types, quantities, designs and mesh sizes of authorised instruments and catching methods, including the types of vessels and times of use. To catch certain species of fish within the context of recreational fishing, a licence (special permit) may be required, and will be subject to a fee. Violation of these restrictions may incur administrative and criminal liability. "rticle of the Criminal Code Illegal fishing of aquatic animals and plants allows for fines ranging from to thousand roubles, or imprisonment for up to two years Part of "rticle ... of the "dministrative Code of the Russian Federation, Violation of the rules regulating the use of wildlifee, introduces a penalty of one to two thousand roubles and confiscation of the vessel and other fishing equipment. Industrial fishing (fisheries) involves the commercial harvesting (catching) of marine biological resources through the use of special means of quality control, processing, handling, transportation and storage of catches and their by-products. The right to use aquatic biological resources is based on the authorisation to harvest (catch) aquatic biological resources and agreement on the use of fishing sites. Some contradictions exist between amateur and commercial fishing. On the one hand, licensees frequently engage in uncontrolled and predatory fishing, thereby restricting access of amateur fishermen to water sites, and, in some cases, leaseholders demand illegal additional fees for fishing at water sites allocated to commercial usage. On the other hand, commercial fishermen point out that amateur fishermen frequently engage in poaching and pollute waterways and river banks.

To return to the issue of fishing in the border river, it should also be noted that active legislation has banned the harvesting of aquatic biological resources by foreign individuals. Of course, Chinese citizens engaging in poaching activities in Russian waters violate the legislation for the provision of the integrity and sovereignty of Russia's state borders. "n agreement On cooperation in the field of conservation, management and reproduction of living aquatic resources in the Amur and Ussuri border rivers, was signed on May between the governments of Russia and China. According to this document, the conservation and reproduction of fish stocks and the regulation of fishing activities with regards to the protection of biological resources take place within the framework of the protection of national borders. In order to implement this document, an operation called Fishing-season-"mur, previously known as East and Frontier, is carried out every year.

The main actor implementing legal enforcement in the sphere of fishing activities is the state inspector for fish conservation. If we are talking about informal fishing activities in the border river, then the provision of formal regulations is also guaranteed by border and other services of the FSB, and, for contraband fishing production, by the customs authorities. Additionally, in the course of special campaigns aiming to curb smuggling, the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry for the Environment, the Ministry for Agriculture and other departments and agencies are also involved.

Chinese legislation, in contrast to Russian legislation, includes stricter sanctions (including the death penalty for the smuggling of tigers, pandas and wild Asian elephants) in respect to violations of environmental legislation. At the same time it allows for criminal, administrative and disciplinary sanctions not only within the law, like the Russian Criminal Code and Administrative Code, but also directly in the legislative acts governing customs and the use and protection of natural resources Lyapustin, Pervushina and Fomenko. In China, the State Council's acting Committee for wildlife plays an active role and public security bodies are actively involved in the control of implementation of legislation relating to environment protection ibid.. .

China and Russia regularly hold meetings and engage in joint campaigns aimed at reducing the number of cases of poaching and smuggling of fish resources from Russia to China. However, despite attempts to harmonise legal enforcement, and regardless of the tightening of applicable sanctions, poaching remains widespread, and every year the situation is only getting worse:

The ubiquitous and widespread nature of poaching, whose aim is frequently to prepare production for subsequent contraband, has been highlighted by the results of activities carried out within the environmental framework of the Ministry for the Environment, the Ministry for Agriculture and the Federal Agency for Fishing. Information originating from all stakeholders in the Far Eastern federal district, demonstrates the massive amount of illicit acts. According to data by the administration of the Primorye region, in over raids were carried out to curb poaching, in the course of which around violations of the legislation relating to environmental protection were found, including poaching. As a result of the activities undertaken, over species of illegally caught animals were confiscated. In , following weekly anti-poaching raids in the Primorye, offences were found. In the region of Khabarovsk, in , crimes were identified, just in the area of illicit traffic of aquatic biological resources they numbered in (Lyapustin, Pervushina and Fomenko 2010: 23).