

Material and immaterial components in border assemblages

Yet, clearly, border assemblages are not only composed of material elements.

In some cases the border between populations may be of a psychologicall nature, and may not even need to be marked in the landscape. Uradyn Bulag, in chapter 3, shows that such is the case between Mongolian and Chinese populations in Inner Mongolia. Although they have been part of the same political formation for the past three centuries at least, their antagonism is the result of a divide-and-rule strategy carried out by Manchu emperors during the Qing dynasty-. Having themselves conquered China thanks to alliances with Mongol groups, Manchu rulers made sure a similar alliance would never arise against them: in addition to erecting a willow palisade between Chinese and Mongolian territories, as an extension of the Great Wall, they made sure through strict legal regulations that Mongol and Chinese people would not intermarry, and that they would engage in as little interaction as possible, even actively fostering hostility between them. As a result, while the willow palisade no longer exists in a material form, it lives on locally as a psychological barrier between these populations. Borders, or rather certain components of the border assemblage, might thus be invisible. This point is particularly well illustrated in chapter 11, in which Ross Anthony takes the reader to the Altai mountain range, in Xinjiang province, where China borders Kazakhstan. Building on ethnographic episodes taken from his fieldwork, "nthony shows that the way the border is envisioned by the local population is as important as its materiality to understand local practices in relation to it. Thus, a bear hunter has to imagine the invisible line demarcating the international border through the Altai range, in order to avoid trespassing and getting into trouble with the border guards. His hunting expeditions, and the path he follows to chase his preys are therefore modelled on an approximate idea of where the linee actually lies. Meanwhile, for the Uygur youth in the border town of Jimunai, the border is pictured as a wall obstructing their dreams of self-accomplishment in Kazakhstan, and one that needs to be overcome. "nthony argues that borders are suffused with technologies of imaginationn, a term he borrows from David Sneathh pictured as single lines, borders thus become part of a broader imaginary whereby the territory of the nation-state is enclosed within clear-cut demarcations.

Racial stereotypes could also be seen as a technology of imagination which extends and reinforces the border between two countries. In chapter , Viktor Dyatlov retraces the history of anti-Chinese sentiments in Russia. Whereas the rhetoric of the Yellow Perill, at the turn of the twentieth century, pictured Chinese people as parasites locusts, midges emerging from a political void, fears of Chinese expansion nowadays envision them as the tentacles of a threateningly powerful and imperialist state. Yet, stereotypes do not only concern interethnic relationship Ivan Peshkov chapter and Marina "aldano chapter show respectively for the Cossacks Gurann and the Shenehen "uryats, that such prejudices also emerge within ethnic groups that have been kept separate as a result of forced migration. The repatriation campaigns carried out in Russia to encourage the return of these populations is rendered difficult by the cultural distance that has accrued, in the space of a few generations, between them and those that stayed behind. Echoing a well established idea in the anthropological literature (Donnan and Wilson , "aldano thus contends that the border represents the interrelations between individuals, groups of people and states. 10 This idea finds an unexpected, yet undeniable echo in Lacaze's contribution, which looks into a characteristic component of border interrelations: prostitution. 11 Through a detailed description of the life of Mongolian sex workers at the Chinese border, Lacaze shows that prostitution is not only an important aspect of cross-border trade, but also a regime of relationship suited to the characteristic liminality of borderland areas.

Borders and regimes of openness

Another reason why borders are more complicated than doors is because contrary to the latter, the former are always open and closed at the same time. In a philosophical essay on bridges and doors, Georg Simmel reflects on the contrast these technical objects offer, as visualisations in space of humanThe idea that borders are spatial and temporal records of relationships between local communities and between states Donnan and Wilson also finds an echo in Janet Carsten's point, mentioned by Franck Billé in his chapter, namely that states were defined on ties of fealty between persons, not on the unambiguous mapping out of spacee Carsten before becoming delineated by international borders. Of course, several authors e.g. "nderson-have stressed that the conceptualisation of states as territorial units delimitated by lines, emerged with specific and relatively recent mapping techniques. 11 In his ethnography of the Mexican border-city of Juárez, Vila analyses the narratives portraying it as a city of vicee bustling with prostitution, and excessive alcohol consumption et passim). According to Vila, the pervasiveness of this idea in the imaginary about borders plays on an intuitive association of the limit of social systems with the limits of the body ibid.. . fundamental ability and urge, to separate the connected or connect the

. 12 Whereas the bridge, argues Simmel, is the perfect instance of permanent connectedness between two points that were initially kept apart by nature, the door always carries both possibilities: it can either be closed, thus separating an inside from an outside, or open, thus allowing passage and communication between the two spaces. In Simmel's own words: