The project, entitled Where Empires Meet The "order Economies of Russia, China and Mongolia RES-______, ran from January to January. The first conference held in Cambridge on July , was entitled Trading, Smuggling and Migrating across the "order between China, Russia and Mongoliaa. The second event, Politics, Concepts and Practicalities at the Chinese Russian "order, was held onNovember 2010, in Cambridge as well.

pulled from one side of the border to another, as wars broke out and the balance of power changed between these empires.

The Buryats, in this respect, are a case in point. The recent history of this Mongol group bears the mark of most of the twentieth-century upheavals that affected the region. Victims of exactions during the Russian Civil war-following the "olshevik revolution, they fled to neighbouring areas in North Mongolia and North-East China, where they lived as exiles throughout the hardships that struck these regions during the Japanese invasion, and the Chinese Cultural Revolution (see Sayana Namsaraeva's chapter in this volume). As described by Marina Baldano (chapter 10), post-socialist attempts of repatriation to Russia for some Buryat groups were often a mixed success as the returnees strove to find a place on either side of the border. Ivan Peshkov chapter , tells a similar story for the Cossack Gurann population that migrated to China and Mongolia as a result of the Soviet regime's hostile decossackizationn policy after the revolution. Contrary to those who stayed in Russia, and who remained attached to the defence of Russian territory, as shown by Caroline Humphrey in her own contribution chapter , these exiled Cossacks have become, through acculturation and intermarriage with other local groups, peoples who belong to the borderland rather than to a particular political formation.

Several contributions to this volume thus broach the well-researched topic of identity and ethnicity of borderland peoples. However, instead of taking notions such as identity, ethnicity or culturee as a point of departure and a frame of analysis, as anthropologists working on borders are wont to do,  this book considers them only as one possible component of the border apparatus. Adopting a technological approach, this volume starts off with very simple questions: what are North Asian borders made of? What are they supposed to do? What, and how do they actually perform on the ground? "lthough culturee and identity might be part of the answers to these questions, a concern shared by the following

The introductory chapter in the book by Hastings Donnan and Thomas M. Wilson is perhaps the most elaborate, and the most often quoted, theorisation of this approach. The authors contend that major changes have affected border areas in the face of the twin threats of supranationalism from above, and ethnonationalism and regionalism from beloww. "nthropologists can contribute to the understanding of these tremendous changes with their expertise on the role which culture plays in the social construction and negotiation of these borders ibid... "nthropologists provide the data to explore the cultural bases to ethnic, racial and national conflict at international borders, a task made all the more urgent by the resurgence of ethnic and nationalist violence at many of the world's borders ibid.. . chapters is really to avoid framing these answers in terms of culturee and identity from the outset.

On this basis, and as mentioned at the beginning of this introduction, this book intends to provide fresh material in a field still heavily dominated by research on the border between the United States and Mexico. Of course, this is not the first attempt at doing so: in addition to European ones, borders of northern India have attracted a great deal of scholarly attention e.g. van Schendel and Gellner Forthcoming, as have those of "frica "siwaju and "denyi , and even "mazonia Goulard .

Undoubdtedly, phenomena observed in other regions also concern this border, or have concerned it in recent history: forced migrations (Baldano, Namsaraeva, Peshkov), transnational trade (Lacaze), anxieties over illegal immigration (Billé, Dyatlov), and attempts to limit the latter while fostering the former. Some issues, however, such as the development of informal networks of transnational poachers (Ryzhova) and smugglers (Namsaraeva), might appear more clearly here than in other border areas.  In addition, the states that meet in this region see themselves not only as nations, but also as civilisations Humphrey, "illéé, whose encounter on the ground cannot be as simple, if it ever can be see Williams and Ettinger , as drawing a line between them.

How (slightly) different a border is from a door: overview of the volume's content

In this context, surely, a border can only be more complicated than a door. But how exactly? This is precisely what the following chapters demonstrate. Each contribution, in its own particular perspective, provides us with ethnographic evidence on how the border works, as a device of passage.  Which elements is a border composed of, what programme is it supposed to perform, and how is it able to do it in practice? These are some of the questions the following chapters could help to answer and which I propose