The border became a site of conflict, as Soviet troops invaded in and in the s and s. The group also found itself the hostage of the Sino-Soviet conflict of. When the border opened and became a site of contact, this further changed the make-up of the group and the economic strategies of its members. The border created this community, demarcated its main parameters and defined the direction of its destiny. The Shenehen "uryats may be called people of the border, or a border community, and their case sheds light on the shifting role played by borders in other areas of the globe.

To some extent, the story of the Shenehen "uryats began in the s when, on the vast expanses of Central Asia, two empires met, thereby creating an international border line of enormous scale, of a total length of more than ten thousand kilometres. Its formation was a natural process of boundary demarcation between two large states, defined through claims and cessions of territorial expanses on which lived less numerous groups who, for reasons of expedience or through coercion, came to be included within these world powers. However, long before that, a Mongolian historical and cultural commonality existed. Despite its heterogeneity, it was unified through a similarity in language, common culture and memory of a great past. While the boundary disrupted this commonality, this was not evident for the nomads who had their own conception of the phenomenon of the border. Here, pastoral nomadism was not simply an economic model, but also a way of life. Under the pressure of economic expediency, borders were mobile and shifted dynamically in the nomads' conceptualisations. Up to the s, "uryats roamed with their cattle, frequently crossing Mongolian and Chinese borders when moving their encampments according to the seasons.

The s saw the beginning of a process of national self-determination among the Mongols, leading to a change of status for certain territories that were included in the Qing Empire. This resulted in a change in the boundary line between China and Russia. The border was formed on adjacent territories see Tsymburski inhabited by peoples smaller in size and culturally lagging behind Russia and Chinaa. This boundary, reflecting the strengthening of Russia and the weakening of China, has dramatically shifted to the south and west over the last years, reducing the area under Chinese control. From the end of the s, the boundary essentially stabilised. It did not change as a result of Japanese aggression against China or of World War II. According to Yuri Galenovich, in the s our country was the only one to help China in its unification into one state. During World War II, our two countries were on the same side. In the s the relations between the USSR and the PRC were officially relations between allies . The main movement of "uryats into China occurred betweenand-. Gasan Guseinov writes "s internal axis and centre delineating the world and its periphery, the border is marked in that region of personal experience that is most exposed to political changes . Indeed, the causes that led the "uryats to seek refuge in neighbouring China were closely related to the policies pursued by the Soviet government against affluent segments of Buryat society and to the repression that ensued. Even before the Revolution, the elimination of Steppe Dumasand the reorganisation of land ownership,

as well as the colonisation of Eastern Siberia by peasants from the western regions of the empire, worsened the economic conditions of the Buryat and Evenki. Eastern Buryats were compelled to rent land from the Cossacks. The situation was worsened by further tax collection and the mobilisation of workers to the hinterland in the region of Arkhangelsk during World War I. Revolution, intervention, civil war and the cataclysms of the socialist transformation increased migration flows in border areas. Thus various groups left Siberia through the Chinese border: members and supporters of the defeated groups, people who strove to live in peace and security, who disagreed with the Soviet authorities, who were considered political enemies or who had become the object of revolutionary experiments. An especially powerful factor of outmigration was collectivisation. Migrations of families with household goods and cattle were extremely arduous and many could not even make it to the border. Lhama-Tsyren of Baruun Somon, who spent seventy-five years in Shenehen, recalls:

In the winter of , dozens of "uryat families established encampments in the Borzinsky steppe. Once, during a frosty night, a horseman came and announced that Russian soldiers had come from the north and that they were moving towards the Chinese border. To avoid them, it was necessary to cross the boundary line urgently. Hundreds of Buryats had already been arrested. Panic took over the camp. The cattle had to be urgently gathered and driven south. People were divided into two groups: one group rounded up the cattle and drove it south, the second group, composed mainly of women and children, collected belongings onto carts and followed the herds. On the second day, the first convoy crossed the Chinese border, but the second group never made it. During the year, many Buryats came from the Russian side but our wives and children were not among them. Its only in the s that we learnt how the convoy had been intercepted, everyone arrested, put on freight trains and deported first to Irkutsk, then to Kazakhstan, where, near Semipalatinsk, a camp had been established for women who had betrayed the motherland. Many died within the first few days. It is only in , when the Chinese border was reopened, that we had the opportunity to meet with those who had survived Pamyati zhertv repressiiii