The "mur fish resources were dealt with in a traditionall manner,

i.e. they were exploited highly intensively both on the Russian and Chinese territories. As a result of official and unofficial fishing, stocks showed continual decline and by , no longer reached tons see

Here, the consensus among researchers is that China has consistently used rivers' biological resources more actively than Russia, due to the vast population living on Chinese territories:

As is well-known, in China's Heilongjiang Province, in areas adjacent to the Amur, fishing and fish farming constitute some of the key industries. Further, in the second half of the 20th century, and especially in the past two decades, the province's population has grown significantly. Under the impact of intensive fishing and environmental changes, sturgeon, salmon and several other species of fish have gradually disappeared from the Songhua River. The number of sturgeons in the upper and middle Amur have also decreased significantly. In the mid-s, a strategy was adopted in the province to expand the fish farming sector as an alternative to fishing, and by the fishing industry already represented just % of the total fish production in the region over thousand tons Novomodnyi, Zolotukhin and Sharov .

Despite the greater activity of Chinese fishermen, their activities on their bank of the river are, as a rule, mostly circumscribed to the realm of formal regulations. Levels of poaching in China are significantly lower than in Russia.

(Lyapustin, Pervushina and Fomenko 2010). In Russia, illegal catches exceed official ones, and the volume of poaching, particularly the illegal fishing of sturgeon, is constantly on the increase. Research on the informal economy is always confronted with the task of evaluating its volume in absolute and/ or relative terms. According to Amurrybvod's data, poaching in the Amur River exceeds legal activities by a factor of two-three (Khabarovskyi krai . These estimates are probably inaccurate. The official catch of chum salmon in the "mur was less than a thousand tonnes in , but according to the methodically justified estimates of Pacific Scientific Research Fisheries Centre PSRFCC specialists Novomodnyi, Zolotukhin and Sharov the consumptive catch of autumnal salmon in the area of the Amur, a length of ,,,, km, amounted to about nine tonnes in. In other words, the discrepancy is already nine times wider, but to this must be added the illegal trafficking of sturgeon, including caviar, as well as other fish (mandarin fish, zheltoschyok, catfish, etc.). According to PSRFC's conservative estimates, the illegal catch, just for sturgeon and only in the main part of the river, was not less than tonnes in. Thus, the excess of informal trafficking of fish over formal activities is to be multiplied by at least ten.

Extralegal fishing practices along the Russian riverbank include:

 fishing without documentation for personal consumption, including prohibited species, through prohibited means, etc.;

 use and appropriation of unlimited fishing rights for industrial aims by representatives of indigenous and minority peoples;  small-enterprise catch by unregistered groups;

 bribery of people in charge, procuring extralegal fishing;

 non-observance of the border regime, creation of networks in

 processing of fish, sea products and caviar for small-enterprise purposes (cutting, salting, packaging), without issue of the documentation appropriate to conducting such business;  creation of enterprises carrying out illegal traffic in fish products, including businesses registered to figureheads; and  trade without documents or with forged documents (including under the guise of products confiscated by conservation organisations).

Many practices are to some extent connected with cross-border exchanges-fish caught illegally are sent to China using false documents:

In the course of search operations, it was revealed that the CEO of one of Vladivostok firms, had acquired for profit more than tonnes of frozen salmon and about tonnes of salt without any documents and had signed a contract with a Chinese firm for the supply of this fish. To obtain the necessary documents for export, three certificates of quality issued by another firm were presented to the Primorye office for Rossel'khoznadzorOn the basis of these documents, veterinary certificates were obtained. To make it look as described in the accompanying papers, on the order of the CEO, the entire fish production was packed into bags tagged with the name of the company listed in the fake quality documentation. After that, the dishonest dealers registered the cargo as export, and part of the cargo was sent to China. But when they attempted to send another batch of vehicles with the fish products, they were detained simultaneously in three places by the Far Eastern Customs Service: in Ussuriysk, in Vladivostok and in the Khasan area FCS .

The FSB and the Federal Customs Service reported informal fishing practices in Russian waters by Chinese citizens, and in particular concerning: Chinese fishermen obstructing the Amur with their nets and not complying with the border regime; buying of illegally obtained fish for export to China, smuggling of fish products; organisation of informal small-enterprise teams on both sides of the river; and the creation of enterprises involved in illegal fishing and/or fish export, including businesses registered to figureheads. Fishing on the opposite (Russian) coast is the most common practices of the private (i.e. non-commercial) use of cross-border natural resources by citizens of the PRC. The aspiration of Chinese to catch fish on Russian territory is due to the fact that, in China, former fishing grounds are significantly regulated by dams, are degraded by industrial pollution, and wild fish populations have been legally and extensively fished for many years, for both commercial and domestic purposes. As a result, many species of fish have disappeared. On the Russian side legal fishing has always been limited, and industrial and agricultural pollution has been lower.