All this led to the formulation of a phobia, combining the geopolitical element of the German variant, the results of extended competitive contacts with migrants, and the fear of losing the Far Eastern region as a result of Sinicisationn, as well as a sober awareness of the areaas complete economic dependence on migrants. These various elements merged into forms of daily racism, migrant phobia and geopolitical fears, rising to levels of mystical feelings of an impending war. Vladimir Solovyev's complex philosophical constructions became the theoretical foundation for this

These constructions also led to a powerful and highly effective metaphor-that of Panmongolism. This image helped reinforce the syndrome of Yellow Perill through the concept of the Mongolian yokee.

From the nineteenth century to the present time Russian public consciousness, official ideology and school curricula have been dominated by the notion that the yokee would be the worst disaster in the countrys history. Panmongolism does not relate in any way to actual Mongols. The mystical Mongols of Panmongolism are symbolic of ideas of yellowness, invasionn and yokee, which coalesce into a general but pervasive fear of a war of the worlds.

Even propaganda leaflets, whose main idea was that, without foreign capital, Russia would lose the Far Eastern region, referred to the impending Mongolian yokee Panov. Within the discourse of the Yellow Perill, a wide spectrum of opinions formed, but the mystical element, the fear of an impending mass war, was almost always present. Its typical symptom-an invasion of yellow hordes-became a familiar theme in the then popular genres of popular literature such as science fiction

These constructions rested on eschatological notions of threat from the East or Yellow Perill as instruments of future deaths in Russia and generally leading to the annihilation of the old world.

The widespread sentiment was that the Chinese are too numerous and that the yelloww population of the Russian Far East was growing at a faster rate than the Russian. The authorities saw the presence of the Chinese as a threat to national security, and there was particular concern about the lack of order and planning of the migration process, the huge scale of illegal infiltration, and the actual extra-territoriality of nationals of neighbouring empires "rseniev. "mur Governor-general Gondatti put it in this way:

As for the political dimension of the question, being firmly anchored in their national culture, maintaining spiritual ties to their homeland, raising on foreign lands the faithful sons of their fatherland, and not feeling an especially strong urge to assimilate into the surrounding population, the Chinese constitute, in this as well, an element of downright hostility Dvizhenie-.

The Chinese were perceived as fertile soil for so-called hunhuznichestvo [Chinese banditry] on a large scale Nadarov-. They were accused of taking their vices to an extreme. Opium dens and gaming houses were frequently described as the centres of Chinese slums (Schrader . These slums were seen as hotbeds of poor sanitation. L. "ogoslovsky wrote that norms of hygiene are foreign to the undeveloped mind of the Chinesee and, given the cost of housing, inaccessible to them this created diseases, high mortality and the constant threat of epidemics (Bogoslovsky-. " huge concern was the smuggling of khanshin (poor quality millet-based alcohol). The Chinese were frequently accused of carrying out predatory plundering of the wealth of the Ussuri taiga, illegal mining and gold smuggling. Exploitation by Chinese traders, poachers and bandits was deeply resented by the indigenous population of the province, and examples abound of violence, torture, murders and various forms of servitude Nadarov "rseniev .

The majority of problems linked to Chinese immigration were assessed in terms of yellow labour. Specialist publications contain a qualified analysis of this state of affairs: industrial and regional dynamics of the practices of the Chinese and Korean workforce, levels of remuneration, cost structure and scale of financial outflow from the country L. G.Mezhduvedomstvennoee Grave Matsokin-Panov-Predvaritellnye. China was able to export a low-cost, disciplined and seemingly unlimited workforce that was capable of quickly mastering new trades and spheres of activity. It was believed that this hindered settlement of the region by Russians, and increased Sinicisationn, could lead to Russia's loss of the region. These beliefs existed in parallel with the understanding that without the yelloww workforce, development of the region was impossible. This resulted in conflicts between various agencies and their specific interests. The successful entrepreneur, public figure and political writer Spiridon Merkulov, argued that the official estimates of the number of Chinese in the region were too low Merkulov , ,. He suggested that the Chinese workers took their money back to China, which undermined the financial stability of the region. He also suggested that the yellow labour constituted an insurmountable barrier to the influx of Russian settlers. According to Merkulov, the extreme cheapness of the Chinese workforce was a result of its technical archaisms, particularly in the mining and manufacturing industries. He noted that Russian peasants and Cossacks lease out their land to the Chinese, and therefore reduce their own participation in productive labour. This leads to problems of parasitism, drunkenness and degradation among them. Chinese workers were becoming a source of social conflicts-strikes, and clashes with Russian workers. Part of the problem of a yellow workforcee was also located in competitive relations in the sphere of commerce. Many authors noted that the Chinese, on account of their energy, entrepreneurship, work ethics and corporatism, monopolised a significant part of the small and medium retail business in a relatively short time.