The first result of the decossackisation policy was the exclusion not only of the Cossacks, but of the cultural and racial hybridity of the area more generally. According to Slezkine's proposal to view the ethno-political structure of the USSR as a communal apartment with separate rooms for particular nations Slezkine , the project of the Soviet Transbaikalia was based on the Russians and Buryats staying separate. Mass migration completely transformed the region's ethnic situation. The local and indigenous inhabitants still played a nominal role in the symbolic and political life of the region, but generally most people had a migrant origin and very weak ties to the non-socialist period of the region's history and culture. In this context socialist modernisation turned out to be a powerful historical circumstance shaping adaptation in accordance with the socialist model of social relations and transforming the model of border management. The second result was the psychological consequences of the new bordering practices. The people living in the borderland areas demonstrated a particular level of political loyalty. "ccording to the Soviet hermeneutics of suspicionn political loyalty was viewed as a broad concept. Their origin, the participation of their relatives in the Civil War and the financial status of their parents had a significant impact on the selection processes of the border residents. The internalisation process of the Soviet propaganda patterns and the development of self-disciplining habits provoked radical changes in the normative Soviet personhood and standards of normality of the social life in the border areas. The third result included the remilitarisation of the area based on Red Army structures and long-term domination of military institutions. Groups with Cossack status were liquidated for the same reasons they had once been established (to form a military and economic complex on the Russian (Soviet)-Chinese borderline).

The quasi-indigenous groups were destroyed both in Mongolia and China. Emigration and mixed marriages led to the appearance of two new ex-Old-Settler communities: local Russians in the Mongolian People's Republic (MPR) and the Three-River Delta (TRD) Russians in China. Those communities differed from Russian immigrants in Inner Asia (i.e. the so-called Harbin Russians) with their village attachment, the local character of migration movements, the Old-Settler cultural background, and their erroneous perception as "taman Semenov's wild Cossacks. This situation provoked a negative politicisation of the groups as well as a tendency to perceive both the Soviet state and Soviet citizens as static objects.

The two groups had different historical experiences and socialisation paths in Soviet society. The TRD Russians experienced periods of cultural and economic domination in their area of inhabitancy Lindgren , the genocidal policy of Soviet military troops in and strong repressions after liberationn in. The immigrants were integrated but maintained their own models of self-organisation. At the time of the Japanese presence-the majority of the TRD Russians were citizens of the state hostile to the USSR and they started to realise all the consequences of that situation: serving in the army and participating in public and cultural life. From until , this community was the object of the sovietisation policy of the institutions in the borderland territories. The USSR turned Russian private schools into Soviet state schools, organised access to Soviet propaganda movies, and encouraged people to return homee. The sovietisation policy and access to citizenship did not guarantee political and cultural rehabilitation in the USSR "blazhei .

The TRD Russians were treated by the state with hostile distance. Those who returned to the USSR before Stalin's deathh were sent to prison or exile, and after destalinisation they were forced to settle in Central Asia (Northern Kazakhstan). Nowadays, the number of Cossack descendants in the region is quite low. "fter , mass migration to the USSR and Australia began. Those who decided to stay in China were mostly of mixed origin (Chinese and Russian) or poor and without relatives in the USSR.

marked the beginning of the black decadee the Cultural Revolutionn in the life of the community, since all the Russian (Orthodox) people were accused of believing in superstition and of spying for the USSR. Aside from the physical extermination of many of its members, the group experienced strict bans on speaking or using Russian (even at home) and on practising its religion. "s a result most of the group members born in the late s have problems speaking Russian or do not speak the language at all (Basharov . The situation of the group improved considerably after and nowadays there is a special socio-economic support policy of Chinese local authorities concerning this community. In the case of the MPR the situation differed significantly. Most of the local Russians in Mongolia found themselves in the country because of the famine, which was not related to Cossack emigration. "efore the community of refugees from the USSR to Mongolia was a small group of stateless peoples and Mongolian authorities were not interested in its situation. The second wave of Mongolia's sovietisation after complicated the lives of the local Russians. "fter those people had Soviet passports (but without the right to live in the USSR) and a generally Soviet identity Mikhailev , but were discriminated against as a hostile group displaying a non-Soviet lifestylee. "fter , mass emigration of local Russians began, mainly to East-Central Europe. The local Russians were viewed by the Soviets as the mythical Semenovtsy who had escaped to hide in Mongolia; they did not understand the significance of the name and started using it as a proper ethnonym.