11. The Persistence of the

Nation-State at the Chinese-Kazakh Border

Ross Anthony

Within the social sciences today there is a wide-spread understanding that boundaries are not simply lines dividing territorial and cultural entities. Studies that view ethnic boundaries and nation state boundaries as constructed "arth Turner "nderson Gellner Gupta and Ferguson now contend with the assertion that states are a set of overlapping institutional practices Sharma and Gupta Mitchell .

With the advent of globalisation and the discourses which sustain it, flows of capital, labour and media are viewed as re-organising the territorial dividing lines of nation-states as we know them"dditionally, there are a variety of cultural ways often contested of conceptualising the notion of the border (see Bulag and Billé in this volume). Within Xinjiang, there is a considerable literature on overlapping ethnic boundaries "ellér Hann et al. and trans-national boundary movement Roberts .

In this chapter, I will argue that while the notion of the border is indeed a multiplicity of discourses, practices and imaginaries, it simultaneously persists as a singular, unambiguous entity. Such persistence, I suggest, is due, in part, to the materials and practices that make up borders (fences, guard towers, walls, maps, check points, military patrols), but also the way that such technologies promote viewing space in a singular way. Using the accounts of several people who live in close proximity to the Chinese border with Kazakhstan in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, I argue that the persistence of the border in absolute terms stems from the relative success of the nationalist project of spatial organisation.

Historical and theoretical considerations

The border I will be discussing covers an area of north-west Xinjiang, stretching from the Ili River Valley in the south to the Altai Mountains in the north, where the border joins up with Russia (the Altai Republic). The region has long functioned as a zone of contestation. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Zhunghar Mongols ruled the region and dominated the Tarim "asin to the south. Following the fall of the Zhunghars, new Qing borders incorporated the region into China. Laura Newby notes that it was during this period that the notion of border treaties and mapping of lines to demarcate precise territorial limits came into being. That being said, borders were often not enforced; the actual border constitutes the establishment of karun-guard posts positioned on routes and passes that were frequently used by travellers entering or leaving Qing territory (ibid.: 12). Still, the establishment of this frontier would have a long lasting impact on how space and identity were to be practiced and imagined. Kazakhs inhabited a somewhat liminal space: dwelling on both sides of the border, they paid allegiance to both the Qing and Tsarist Russia. "lthough the Kazakhs were classified as tributaries of the Qing, many were beyond their direct control. Following Qing conquest, Uyghurs were moved into the Ili River "asin area in order to form agricultural colonies. In the Ili River Valley was annexed by Russia when the Qing were driven out by a Muslim uprising led by Koqandi adventurer Yakub Beg.

By the mid twentieth century, the entire region was in revolt due to the warlordism and Han Chinese favouritism under the KMT regime (Forbes . The entire border region, from the Tian Shan to "ltai, rose up in revolt to form the East Turkestan Republic which lasted from to Lias "enson. When Xinjiang fell to the communists, the region re-integrated into China proper. In , following the Sino-Soviet split, between and thousand Kazakhs and Uyghurs, escaping famine and the political purges of the Great Leap Forward, migrated across the border to the Soviet Union. The border was shut shortly after this (Millward . The depopulated areas were re-populated with demobilised

People's Liberation Army troops from Inner China. The primary task of these soldiers, known as the bingtuan or the Production-Construction

Military Corps (Shengchan jianshe bingtuan), was to reclaim desert land, farm it and fortify the border regions McMillen. "y there were ,,,, personnel assembled Toops by the s the figure rose

to over one million. A number of events, including the fall of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan's independence and China's economic turn, have led to the border functioning today as an area of international trade. The bingtuan, who own several large border-trading companies, are also heavily invested in border trade. With the rise of the market economy, this border region has also recently developed national parks, the most famous of which is the Kanas Lake Nature Reserve. As this brief history shows, the construction of the international boundary is multiple. The border has moved place several times and has re-aligned ethnic identities. However, with the rise of the Chinese nation state in the twentieth century we see the increasing emergence, despite the internationalism of Socialism, of a more precisely-defined Chinese nation-state space Dirlik Duara. "enedict "nderson suggests that the pre-nation state era, in which borders were porous and indistinct, and sovereignties faded imperceptibly into one another have been transformed into entities in which state sovereignty is fully, flatly and evenly operative over each square centimetre of a legally demarcated territory ibid... This has necessitated a fundamental shift in the articulation of how space is divided. David Sneath et al. have used the term technologies of the imaginationn to refer to materials and processes that elicit various ways through which people imagine their relationship to the world. While the authors insist that any such technology is never totalised , it is equally true that large-scale projects, such as that of the nation state, distribute homogenising technologies in an attempt to create collectively stable imaginaries. "illigs notion of banal nationalism-the circulation of flags, money, turns of phrase and so on-function as important mediators through which the space of the nation is imagined . One constraint such technologies exploit is a simple limit to which humans are subject: that one cannot simultaneously inhabit various places at the same time; that one is forced to imagine spaces vaster than one's perceptual horizon.