

and outsiders. Nowadays, ethnographic writings are richer, and draw attention to personal experience, self-reflection and autobiographical accounts that bring more subjectivity and dynamics into academic writing. Moreover, there is a growing tendency to treat personal experience also as ethnographic data, especially by those who do anthropology at homeee they more often position themselves somewhere between being an ethnographer and an informant, trying to maintain a double vision that combines both. Accordingly, I will use my own recollections (including from times before my professional training) and personal experiences of family reunions. I will also include personal impressions of witnessing difficult moments of family reunion, when people who had been separated by state boundaries, catastrophically changing politics and personal anxiety, finally succeeded in finding one another.

The significant geographical distance between my natal home in Russia and my fieldwork sites in Mongolia and China did not allow me to feel at homee. Deploying my grandparents kinship ties with people whom I had never met (in most cases) also presented me with a number of challenges, even if we speak the same dialect. So, my experience in the field was not dramatically different from that of other outsider colleagues, despite having more emotional involvement and personal responsibility. Being familiar with Buriad culture did not grant me insider status either. On the contrary, I felt as though I was being examined on how authentic I was; it seemed that, by looking at me, the diaspora could make judgments about Buriads in Russia in general, whether or not they were still bearers of Buriad customs and identity or have already become entirely Russified. Perhaps some of them saw me as the right person to talk to not only about their family, but about all matters concerning Buriads. Those I spoke to touched upon broad topics including how Buriads live in Russia; in which ways Orosiin (Russian) Buriads-or khoit nutgiin Buriaduud (Buriads from northern homeland)-are different from Mongoliin Buriaduud (Mongolian "uriads and popular issues like how we "uriads live in three countries and in which country do "uriads live better?. They often compared their own experience to that of their kin who live in Chinese Hulun Buir and call themselves Shenehen Buriads.

On hearing these conversations about different places and different people I could not help but see them all as reflections on the notion of the "uriad homeland, and the expression of personalized concerns about kinship and places that are called nutag (homeland). In the following section I highlight the range of historical and cultural senses of the term nutag in order to link it with migratory Buriad consciousness, and I investigate how the changing discursive landscape of nutag evolved finally into diasporic reflections on community and individuals.

The "homeland" lexicon in the Mongolian language

The Mongol language (including its Buriad dialect) has developed a rich vocabulary to express the socio-spatial characteristics of the notion of homeland. Many meanings can be expressed by the term nutag, which is used in various grammatical forms as a noun, adjective and verb in numerous word-combinations. Traditionally nutag refers to the area of seasonal migration, for example, gazar nutag (land territory) and nutag belcher (grazing space); it also suggests that many criteria must be met for good grazing land. Thus nutagluushtai is an adjective qualifying places with good potential for grazing livestock. In the historical and anthropological literature we can find references to the variety of its uses. For example,shows that part of the nutag-related lexicon was created during the Manchu period following changes in jurisdiction over land in Mongolia. The term was used to express a shift in rights to use or possess land. For example, pastures could be measured and divided (nutgiin deeslekh), confiscated (nutag khuraakh) and granted to a different owner (nutag evdekh). Furthermore, people could be expelled from their land (nutag khüükh).

Uradyn Bulag also explains various meanings of the term nutag but focuses more on everyday conceptions that reinforce its territoriall meaning. There is a traditional view that a specific land is possessed by ancestral spirits, and is thus confined to a particular people. Usually the main inhabited area and the boundary of the nutag is marked by oboos (ritual cairns), which embody the local spirits and are places of communal worship. The oboo were associated with obligations to make offerings to ancestral and local spirits (gazariin ezen), which are considered to have control of nature and living creatures. Offerings, either during the large collective ceremonies (once a year) or during individual visits to homeland oboos (nutagee oboo takhikh), were aimed to obtain the protection of spirits and thus to legitimise people's rights to use the nutag. It is believed that favorably inclined local spirits or masters of the land would sustain the fertility and vitality of the places with rich pastures and clean water sources, enabling people to increase their herds and have numerous children. Nutag can be located at different levels, from a larger space to a local one, and can vary in scale depending on whether it refers to the group or to the individual. Expressions such as törsön nutag or turel nutag can be translated as birthplace homeland or natal land and do not signify strict territorial limits, while another term toonto nutag placenta homeland points to the particular site where the parental encampment (ger or yurt) was situated at the moment of the child's birth. A special ritual, at which the child's afterbirth was buried under the yurt (toomtolkho or toonto khadagalkha) establishes an intimate and magical relation between the person and the birth place. Interestingly, another meaning of toonto is a special type of knot, while the verb form toontodokho means to tie-up. This seems to indicate that the person is understood to be tied-up and attached to the place where his/her placenta is kept and remains connected to it throughout life. People believe in the special power of the toonto nutag over the individual fate and spiritual strength. Strong attachment to nutag in general evokes deep emotional feelings and sentiments, and becomes a source for constant inspiration of nostalgic lyrics and poetical longings. The obligation to attend it and execute life protecting worshipping practices (toonto taikha) 񮽙 at the individual birthplace involves specific connotations and additional complexities of the homeland concept for "uriads.