, that in these societies,  [r]ather than any clear-cut 'us' versus 'them' or 'private' versus 'public', there was a ubiquitous self-embedding or interweaving of these categories.

But he also comments on their underlying assumption that socialism was based on a complex web of immoralitiesclaim that  everyone to some extent [was]complicit in the system of patronage, lying, theft, hedging and duplicity of thought which the system operated', and that often even intimates, family members and friends informed on each other Yurchak. Caroline Humphrey pointed out that the state and state institutions in socialism were not defined as separate from the people or the public sphere, but incorporated everyone, top to bottom, through complex, multiple, and shifting nesting hierarchies consecutively embedded like Russian dolls. The following stories present vivid examples of what kind of immoralities people had to face if they wanted to visit a homeland across the border, and how relations based on ethnicity and kinship needed to be hidden and concealed. It was a common practice in the Soviet block states to set up brother capitals, brother towns and even brother state farms. Uzon village, officially named kolhoz Voroshilova, 10 was considered to be one of the best and most progressivee Rus. peredovoi) collective farms in the Chita region. The Mongolian village across the border, "ayan-Uul, became a brother collective farm. In this official partnership the Mongolian village was the menteee Rus. podshefnyi) while the village from the Soviet side acted as the mentor patronising partner Rus. shefskii) in the official discourse of Soviet-Mongolian relations. Ironically, Bayan-Uul, a hundred kilometers away from Uzon, had been established by Buriad emigrants who had fled from Uzon and the neighboring villages Tokchin and Alhanai. In official discourse, these brother state farms were local symbols of Soviet-Mongolian friendship, and examples of how Soviets provided economic and social help to Mongols. But in private and individual discourse Mongols from the Mongolian side and Soviets from the Russian side were all connected within a net of related kin groups. To illustrate how official, private and individual categories were mixed at the local level, I use the story of a retired Communist Party functionary, Lodoi, who was the Chairman of the Uzon collective farm during the-s

Visits from Bayan-Uul, our Mongol podshefnii kolhoz were arranged and controlled by the okruzhnoi partkom [district Communist party committee in "ginskoye distric center]. They gave me instructions on how to make a good reception for Mongolian guests. We, a group of parthozaktive noyod [Rus.parthozactiv local party and administration activists;usually went to meet the Mongol delegation at the nearest Russian border pass not far from here, at Ul'hun. But you know, the Head of Bayan-Uul Somon in Mongolia at that time was my cousin Jamso. We knew that we were brother-relatives (akha-duu). He was one of the sons of my father's elder brother "usha. I found "usha in. "t that time our kolhoz was allowed to send work brigades to Mongolia to cut hay in the frontier area according to the Soviet-Mongolian Border Cooperation Agreement. Buriads there one by one contacted us and asked about their relatives. They all were from our nutag (manai nutagei zon). I asked them about my uncle Ausha, they told me that he lives in Eren, not far from them. I went to Eren and found him. He cried and wailedthat all his life he hid the fact that he had relatives in Soyus [Soviet Union]. Only later he told his sons about us. So, you see Jamso was a son of my uncle Ausha. Usually Jamso came as a member of Mongolian delegations, also with some important Khalkh Mongols from the Aimag center. We greeted each other, but Jamso spoke only Khalkh Mongol like the whole Mongol delegation or Russian with other Russians from Chita [the regional capital city]. What a time! We did not dare even to talk to each other [with Jamso] openly in "uriad language. "s Chairman of the kolkhoz I had a state Volgaa car. 11 Once after an official meeting I invited Jamso with Mongolian guests to the riverside to have an unofficial party there. While others were busy drinking and eating, I briefly asked Jamso about Ausha-ahai and other family related things. It was really strange time (jigte sag! "ut I also denied that I had relatives abroad in all official papers and forms. I also denied that I was kulak spawnn [Rus. kulatskoe otrodie or Bur. muu zonei ulegdel], even if the whole kolhoz knew that my parents were repressed and other relatives lived in Mongolian Bayan-Uul Lodoi, years old, Uzon, Russia, .

Even if Lodoi expresses his surprise at the conditions of the time, as a local functionary he understood very well how to combine his individual needs with official tasks. He used official visits to go to Mongolia and found time for his personal wish to find his relatives there. As an official functionary he lied and denied that he had relatives abroad. As an individual, he kept memories of his family and tried to maintain relations with them. He also understood why his relatives did not dare to openly reveal that they were his kin or speak Buriad among accompanying Khalkh Mongols, because Buryats in Mongolia were still the object of latent ethnic discrimination from the Khalkh majority. Lodoi also understands why Russian language was the only language of official communication during meetings with Mongols, because it was the language of transmitting the official Soviet ideology and the language of the Soviet ruling elite. In his story he calls them obkome orod (Russians from the regional party committee). His story is an interesting example of attempts to keep up individual family relationships under an official pressure to cut these ties.