1. A Slightly Complicated

Door: The Ethnography and Conceptualisation of North Asian Borders

Grégory Delaplace

This book presents a collection of ethnographic essays on the border region, in North Asia, where the territories of China, Russia and Mongolia meet across the contrasted landscapes of the Siberian taiga, in the northwest, and the Manchurian plains, in the south and the east.The aim of the present volume is two-fold. On the one hand, it seeks to provide fresh material to a field of research still heavily dominated by studies of the United States and Mexico border. On the other, it intends to challenge a tendency in anthropological research to frame analysis in terms of culturee and identity when dealing with issues relating to social life in the borderland areas. Drawing on the material provided throughout the eleven chapters of this volume, this introduction proposes an alternative, and underlines the benefits of a technological approach to the study of borders.

International borders have attracted an increasing amount of interest in the social sciences over the past three decades, resulting in the creation of research centres (e.g. the Centre for International Borders in Belfast or the Nijmegen Centre for Border Research in the Netherlands), academic networks (e.g. the Association for Border Studies, which edits the Journal of Borderlands Studies), and in countless publications in the fields of Geography, Political Sciences, Economy, and History, to name only a few (for a useful yet now outdated overview, see Donnan and Wilson , chapter. While it has not been a trailblazer in this domain, Social and Cultural Anthropology has not lagged behind either. Although the anthropology of borders has not yet been recognised as one of the discipline's big topics it is rarely mentioned in specialised encyclopedias, e.g., anthropologists have contributed to this field of research in numerous and important ways. Highlighting the processes by which borders are socially or culturally constructed, some have insisted on the growing number of challenges posed by globalisation to the notion e.g. Migdal , while others have emphasised the enduring significance of borders at a local level in a context of global political and economic transformations (e.g. Donnan and Wilson

Overall, and at least since Renato Rosaldo's early and seminal contribution to the field , the idea has been that the specific expertise anthropologists could provide in relation to borders concerned culturee, identity or ethnicity in borderland areas. Is there an identity specific to the borderlands milieuu Martinez , stemming from the simultaneous distance from political centres and the daily immersion in transnational flows that characterises these areas? How is ethnicity used as a border marker between neighbouring peoples, in borderlands (Vila or elsewhere "retell ? What kind of culturee does the presence of an international border produce, and what kind of cultural practices, in turn, constitute borders between territories and people? These, roughly, have been the questions on which the anthropology of borders has thrived. One could hardly fail to notice, however, that a particular subfield of anthropology has remained remarkably absent from this debate: material culture, or technology, that is the study of techniques spearheaded by Mauss'Introduction criminologists have provided valuable expertise on the implications of this technology in terms of conceptions of the body, conditions of international migrations and notions of citizenship van der Ploeg Pickering and Weber Dijstelbloem and Meijer .

Nevertheless, when scholars have considered the question of technology in relation to the border, they have limited themselves to the study of how it was involved in the process of crossing a particular border (often the one delimitating Schengen space). The concern of these authors lies in the way technology is becoming constitutive of European borders, indeed in ways that cannot but call to mind Agamben's famous warning on exceptions becoming the rule.While these developments are certainly cause for concern, and one can only encourage research into the political implications of borders' technological turn, it seems possible to conceive of a more comprehensive understanding of technology in relation to the border.

So far, indeed, it seems that anthropologists, just like other social scientists, have neglected the analytical benefits of considering the border itself as a technique. Yet, it seems hardly possible to overlook that a border is first and foremost a technical object: in fact, what is a border but a slightly complicated door?

Doors and the (unsuspected) relations between office colleagues, cats, and gulls

In the opening essay of a small book entitled Petites leçons de sociologie des sciences "runo Latour-finds an unlikely ally in Gaston Lagaffe, a Belgian comic strip character created by Franquin, to introduce his notion of a technical programmee. 3 Gaston Lagaffe is famous for the sympathetic blend of naive humanism and laziness that constitute his personality, as well as for the simultaneous taste for DIY methods and perennial clumsiness that characterise his daily activity his surname means the blunder in Frenchh.

The setting of Gaston's adventures is an office, actually the editorial offices of Spirou, the very magazine in which the comic strips were originally

The reader will find in the volume edited by Sharon Pickering and Leanne Weber several chapters developing "gamben's concept of exceptionn in relation to border control (see, for example, the one by Pickering herself, and the one by Dean Wilson). 3 Petites leçons de sociologie des sciences was originally published under the title La Clef de Berlin, et autres leçons d'un amateur de sciences.