

From the beginning of World War II, the Shenehen Buryats, fearing a Soviet invasion, attempted to move away from the border. Up until , the Buryat migration that occurred within Inner Mongolia, together with emigration, played a significant role in the dynamics of the localisation of the Buryat ethnic population in Shenehen. The life of Buryats in China was wholly determined by the border as people who attempted to move away from it ended up being returned.

The occupation of Manchuria by Soviet troops ended on "pril . Following liberation from Japanese occupation, the Hulun "uir Autonomous Region was created. After joining up the Inner Mongolia "utonomous Region in January , it became the Hulun "uir aimag, and the Shenehen somon was established on the same date.The modern administrative and territorial structure of governance finds its origins in when, as a result of the reorganisation of the Shenehen Somon, the three somons of Baruun Shenehen, Shenehen Zuun and Mungen Shuluun were created and included within the Evenki hoshun of Hulun Buir aimag. However, following the liberation from Japanese occupation in China, a new war, this time a civil war, between the communists and the Kuomintang, broke out. Buryats had experienced the brunt of mass terror in during the events in connection with the CER and, in the s and s, they found themselves the object of counterespionage activities by the USSR and Japan. The border had become more than simply a watershed between sovereign states. It also acted as a boundary between different societies; the idea of clear and immutable borders under lock was increasingly reinforced. In the years of Stalinism and the Iron Curtain, when having a relative abroad threatened one's freedom and even life, numerous kinship ties were lost and severed. In the s, the Sino-Soviet border was considered by China as unfair. In-, the Chinese government began to implement an elaborate system of constant and serious violations of the Soviet border. In there were more than ,,,, violations involving more than ,,,, Chinese civilians and soldiers "orisov and Koloskov. This was an undeniable factor of stress for the Shenehen Buryats who lived in close proximity to the border. The prospect of such a confrontation between the two countries was simply incomprehensible to them.

"t the height of the Cultural Revolution-, the Shenehen "uryats, living as they did in close vicinity to the Soviet border, found themselves at the epicentre of anti-Soviet political campaigns. Provocations on the border became more frequent crowds of provocateurs dressed as soldiers and wielding clubs, axes, crowbars and rocks, not uncommonly attacked Soviet border posts. Violating the border, they refused to obey the orders by Soviet border guards to leave the territory of the USSRR Prozrachnye granitsy . Many were arrested on charges of spying for the Soviet Union and Panmongolism. Both executive and rank and file Shenehen Buryats were subject to political repression. "ccording to informants, both in the USSR and at home, we were considered traitors and Japanese spies, and during the Cultural Revolution we were seen as Soviet spies and Panmongolists Fieldwork notes, "ugust. The history of each

Buryat family is an example of their desperate struggle for survival in an atmosphere of sweeping accusations, arrests and punishments.

From the s, a new approach was taken in border negotiations. In , the Shanghai Fivee was established, uniting Russia, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. As early as the time of Deng Xiaoping, the people who had been victims of repression were rehabilitated, reinstated to their posts and had their property restored. In the period of socialist modernisationn, the Shenehen "uryats finally had the opportunity to return to their familiar way of life. Today they are a fairly prosperous group, with their main economy remaining tied to animal husbandry. In order to run individual farms, large tracts of land were taken on a 30-year lease, and it is possible for them to employ hired labour. Three Buryat schools are in operation and the datsan ["uddhist monastery in the Mongolian cultural region] that were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution have been restored.

The border with Russia opened up, along with the opportunity to rebuild ties with the historic homeland the early s saw a process of repatriation of Shenehen Buryats, and about 300 people returned to Russia. Today their numbers have risen to almost , more than of them in "uryatia, and a little less than people in the "ga District. Motives for moving to Russia varied: they were nostalgic (it was still seen as the birthplace of the ancestors, economic seeking new opportunities and educational (they were offered preferential programs). According to informants in Shenehen, young people were also sent to broaden the range of marriage partners as the small closed community needed new blood.

Today we are witnessing the rapid transformation of the border from a wall or barrier into a site of encounters, contacts and interactions. With the development of border trade, some Shenehen Buryats started to engage in service activities, working with the Buryats and Russians who came to Manchuria and Hailar in order to purchase cheap Chinese goods. Contacts with the Buryats of Siberia allowed many Shenehen Buryats to find their relatives who lived on the other side of the border. It was now possible to go and work in the Transbaikal region and in Buryatia. The Shenehen Buryats who had previously settled in the Transbaikal region could facilitate the organisation of such work. Many of them regularly visit relatives in Shenehen, which promotes the development of cross-border linkages.