

Critique of Neo-Eurasianism

Many sober Russian observers take civilisational analysis seriously because they realise the influential role it plays in political attitudes, and they are therefore all the more anxious to point out its contradictions and defects. Kaganskii , for example, castigates Neo-Eurasianism for sanctioning messianistic, anti-Western, and essentialist attitudes. He writes that the concept of Eurasia proposes a macro-region that because of its vast size and variation is suitable for autarchy. But this is an idea of self-determination through space, by the occupation of territories and places, and, whatever the proclamations, in fact does not establish the values of a civilization realised through history (thus Gumilev's promotion of the Mongolian Empire as a Eurasian prototype for Russia is, in Kaganskii's view, pure nonsense, since the two are quite different in structure and culture, . Preoccupation with extent goes with lack of attention to the content of Eurasia, the reality of its internal complexity and diversity of parts. For the Neo-Eurasianists it is enough to hold that great size indicates the greatness of the state. Eurasian space is sacralised and given a mythic vertical (an allusion to a magical hierarchy of power). But Eurasia is actually manifest only horizontally, that is again extensively .

Kaganskii maintains that this spatial kind of self-definition, given fundamentally by the position of Eurasia, and therefore by what is not Russia, is quite different from ideas found in either the main European nations or in China. There, countries define themselves positively, by their ideals, achievements and special values, and space does not play such an important role. China as the Middle Kingdom never sees itself as not Indiaa, for examplee and its relation to the people of the steppes is one of bearing a coherent civilisation to a hazy barbarian periphery. In other words, the centre in the Chinese case, does not define itself in space; rather it defines space .

The Neo-Eurasian vision, by contrast, insists on the naturalness of Russian borders. Not only is this a delusion, Kaganskii writes, which ignores the history of border indefiniteness and changeability, 񮽙 but it becomes a mythology based on unacknowledged contradictions: for the theory proposes absolute laws of the spatial rightness of states but simultaneously holds that it (Eurasia) is higher than and supersedes such laws when they are applied to any other region than itself. Finally, Kaganskii observes, if we ask ourselves the question What type of space doesEurasia correspond to? the answer has to be cartographic space. This is a simple representation of contours and colours on a map, like a schoolroom map, or one that may indeed hang on the walls of prominent politicians or appear as background for television programmes , and all that the Eurasianists add to the schoolroom version is a notion of natural global zonality, on which rests their geo-political strategy-. 񮽙

We cannot say, Kaganskii writes, whether such maps are ever used as working documents, or whether they are just mental maps-in all probability the latter. Nevertheless, the mental freeing of Russia from Empire has not led to construction of a non-imperial Russia. The systematic imaginative overriding of culturall spaces, such as demographic, landuse, ethnic, confessional, linguistic, etc. spaces, by a naturall one, has facilitated confusion over whether what is represented is Russia as an Eternal Empire or Russia itself. It is to this confusion that the present political system corresponds, with its mono-centrism and stratification, rent-resource economic orientation, the low role given to provinces and the high importance given to external and internal boundaries-.

The salience of civilisational perspectives for the Russia-China border

The ideological aspect of the Russian-Chinese border can be related to nationalism, or in this case to the conflation of the nation-state with Kaganskiiis critique on this point would find support in Zatsepinees study of the "mur River, which highlights the shifting and secretive character of even this, seemingly most obvious, dividing line Zatsepine . Kaganskii observes that these maps, which ignore alternative projections that would reduce the size of Russia, are immediately understandable to people with Soviet education, but difficult to recognise for people brought up in other systems .

the post-empire. "s John Dunn n.d.. has pointed out, the two primary presences of nationalism in contemporary political life, each with protracted pasts, are as strategies for political leaders (incumbent or aspirant), and as more diffuse imaginative susceptibility to such strategies, dispersed to varying degrees across populations. There is a large literature on the influence of Eurasianism on the foreign policy of Russia's current leaders-significant according to some "erman Sidorov , negligible according to others Schmidt Leonard , and relevant primarily as a factual geography that underpins Russia's legitimate role in East "sia affairs for yet other writers Rangsimaporn. 񮽙 I would point out only that both of Dunn's two locales for nationalism, i.e. not only among political leaders, are pertinent in our case, for contemporary Russia combines autocracy with a version of electoral democracy in what Henry Hale has called a hybrid regimee. In such a regime, public opinion, ratings and more generally the popularity of leaders has an important and distinctive role Hale. Thus the fact that Putin has courted