Concrete methods exist to legally enforce formal rules (analysis of publications of the officiall baseee in five out of eighteen of the cases analysed, the FSB declared the launch of a criminal investigation. Criminal cases, recorded in the database, mostly involved violations of the state border and the smuggling of large quantities of fish, but did not include poaching. Russian legislation does not allow for criminal prosecution for illegal trafficking in fish, only for its illegal production. Therefore, all poachers (Russian or Chinese), who do not have nets in their boats, can claim that they found the fish, decided to look after it, were surprised to find the fish in the boat when they returned from dinner, etc.

The main sanction for Chinese citizens is the confiscation of their equipment, and, in some cases, boats, as well as short-term detention and subsequent transfer to the Chinese authorities. In only one case out of eighteen, the FSB announced a sentence, which, incidentally, was also relatively mild:

The tribunal of the "mur region sentenced to three months detention two citizens of China for violating Russiaas state borders The court sentenced the perpetrators to a period of three months' imprisonment, to be served in a penal colony. Given that they were detained during preliminary investigations, the sentence has already been served by the prisoners. They were therefore released and left Russiaas territory FSS b.

The changes in the legislation and mechanisms for its enforcement implemented in Russia and China and resulting from negotiation processes, do not lead to a decrease in cases of poaching and appear in fact to merely exacerbate the social dilemma of differences between individual and public interests.

Informal practices in fishing activities

The analysis of the officiall basis of the FS" and Federal Customs Service

shows that, as indicated by official documents regarding the poaching and smuggling of fish resources, up to % of all violations occur on the Russian-Chinese border (followed in second place by forests, then sea products, wildlife and flora, then finally minerals). Nonetheless, official statistics indicate that forests are the main resource for which regulations are violated (

Of course, informal fishing on the Amur border river has a long history Lyapustin. Given that informal economic activities aim at avoiding the costs linked to compliance with laws and administrative regulations, we can say that informal fishing on the border river began with the creation, in the Russian Empire, of formal rules regarding the use of natural resources in the Far East. At the turn of the twentieth century, there were illegal (i.e., in violation of the law) cross-boundary practices: in particular in relation to fishing by Chinese nationals of the most valuable fish species in inland Russian waters and exploitation of the indigenous population for this purpose. However, until January , i.e. until the abolition of the-verst free-trade strip, fishing in the "mur River had a more extralegal character (i.e. unregulated by applicable legislation): the Chinese harvested, bought and exported without duties resources such as fish (

Changes in the existing rules, as well as the socio-economic and political turmoil in the pre-revolutionary, Soviet and post-Soviet periods, did not inhibit access to fishing resources in the Amur River by Chinese citizens, although an extremely strict enforcement in the s-s did reduce illegal (from the point of view of Russian legislation) Chinese activities along the Russian bank, which due to particularities of the riverbed, is richer than the Chinese side.

It would be nonetheless naïve to imagine that Soviet citizens were not involved in informal fishing practices. They did not have any economic stimulus to fish on the Chinese side. They had, however, numerous reasons to engage in illegal fishing practices on their own shoree. Moreover, prohibitions introduced in the Soviet period and at other times frequently contribute directly to the creation of informal rules:

On averagee, in the s and s, the catching of [mandarin fish] was probably a sporadic occurrenceup to a quarter of the fish caught with floating nets were mandarin fish. However, because of the ban on catching them, the mandarin fish caught by fishermen for personal consumption and through commercial fishing was not included in statistics In our assessment, the effectiveness of all these prohibitions is very low when there were indeed very few until the mid s, fishermen did not release the zheltoschyok [Elopichthys bambusa] they caught it seemed silly to release fish that was dead or half-dead). In addition, it is impossible to follow every single fisherman, and zheltoschyok is considered a delicacy by many residents of the "mur. Since during the Soviet period it was difficult to sell red book species' officially, the zheltoschyok caught by fishing companies ended up in the homes of fishermen Novomodnyi, Zolotukhin and Sharov .

Pilfering was just one form of the informal economy of Soviet times. Fish brought home (as well as any other commodity) became the subject of monetary and non-monetary forms of exchange. However, emerging informal practices became fixed over time, and changes in formal rules (e.g. transition to the market) just created a terrain for its transformation. Indeed, during the economic collapse, when Far Eastern fishermen as well as other workers did not receive their salaries for several months, a survival mechanism emerged on its own. As a result of this and other reasons, various informal and illegal practices consolidated, were becoming a tradition.