

People should remind the spirits about themselves and renew their ties with this segment of homeland by holding certain home making rituals.

Detailed descriptions of these rituals are found in the writings of the Mongolian ethnographer G. Tserenhand and the Russian ethnographer of "uriad origin, Klara "asaeva. They explain that movement from the winter encampment to summer pasture was highly ritualised. It included several blocks of rituals. These are enacted at the moments of departure, arrival at the new place, marking a chosenn place as already reserved (geriin on avakh), rituals of worshiping and symbolic payment to local spirits ejen, masters of the land) for the right to use their territory, rituals of feeding the master of the fire place in the newly erected ger, etc. Actually, moving away and separating from one encampment means homecoming to another encampment.

In the cyclic seasonal movement between at least two homes-summer encampment zuhalan and winter encampment übeljöön 񮽙-the latter was perceived as the main and more fixed one. Severe winter conditions required herders to locate winter encampments at secure places: less windy with low snow cover and pastures for different types of domestic livestock. Standing wooden fences (khashaar) to keep cattle warm and secure from wind and wolves, the wooden winter ger 񮽙 and horse tethering pole (serge) all marked the territory as someone's permanent place of residence, even if the family left it temporarily for summer camp(s). Winter encampments with permanent constructions stand closer to one another and are more compact, organising a group of kin families into a small settlement (ail).

In general, the orbital trajectory could be widened and narrowed depending on environmental conditions (draught, plague, etc.) and other circumstances, such as war, land disputes between pasture claimants, or when the expanded clan divided into several lineages. In these cases, the trajectory could be changed. People searching for new pastures (or a more peaceful place) could move to another orbit, where a foreign landscape could be again domesticated and transformed into a new homeland using these rituals. An additional set of rituals was used for settling if the family arrived at a completely new place. This ritual was a sort of transplanting of the homeland to the new settlement. In Buriad folk practice the separating group carried with them some stones from their natal oboo at the parental nutag and put them into the foundation of the worshiping site at the new location.

Ethnographic literature provides some descriptions of this practice among different groups of "uriads. For example, Taras Mikhailov writes that groups of Ekhirit Buriads that have moved to a new place would take stones from the oboo on Baitog mountain, where, as people believe, a powerful local spirit resides. At their new settlement, they would erect a cairn using the stones, thus creating a substitute of Baitog oboo at the new place and keeping lineage succession Mikhailov. "uriad refugee-migrants followed the same traditional practice when they arrived. As I was told in Dashbalbar, migrants brought with them stones from their Interesting comparison between pastoral herding and sailing activities have been made Chabros Pedersen. It is suggested that movement between pastures is not perceived as movement; even though there is a change in the surrounding landscape as ger and its contents remain the same. "uriads used to build winter wooden ger a shape of seven/eight wall yurt or Russian style wooden houses. Felt yurt in which family lived during the summer was built inside the wooden carcass of ger, thus making it much warmer in winter.

nutag and put them into the base of the Buddhist temple that the newcomers erected near their settlement at River Jarakhei. Another example from Shenehen tells us that newcomers adopted a local oboo which had been worshiped by local Evenkis before the Buriads arrived. They put some stones, brought from the homeland, into the existing construction of the oboo at Bain Khaanei mountain.

Nevertheless, individual practice could differ from group practice. One family history from Bayan-Uul in Mongolia tells how a Buriad son accomplished his father's last will-to return a little piece of gray stone back to the oboo at Budalan mountain at his father's nutag on the Russian side. The son, who is today a famous Mongolian poet and representative of the diaspora's second generation, was only able to visit his father's natal village, Suduntui, at the end of the s, when he himself was years old.

He found his relatives in the village and told them the amazing story of his father who, just before he escaped, had grabbed at a gallop a piece of stone from the local oboo and fled. He carried it on his body when he was hiding for two years in the forest from Mongolian soldiers, who, on Soviet Russia's order, were hunting for counter-revolutionaries who had escaped from Russian territory. He kept it with him after he was caught, sentenced to prison, and sent to dig fortification ditches on the Mongolian border with Manchukuo in the s, when he was wounded during the Japanese Kwantung army air attack on the frontier, and when he was released from the prison after Stalinns death in the mid s and returned to his wife in Bayan-Uul. Probably it was his individual choice that he did not want to be rooted in exile, because he kept this piece of stone hoping that one day he would go back to his nutag. Perhaps he kept it with him as a sacred object, as a piece of homee, as a protective symbol that tied him to his homeland. By bringing this piece of stone back to his father's homeland, the son symbolically completed his father's life trajectory, returning him to the place where he was born.