 they take jobs away from Russians;

 they take away/steal Russian forests, metals and other natural resources; and  they divert capital away from Russia.

Intimately linked to the overall set of migration myths is the belief in the absolute and inherent criminality of Chinese migrants (Vitkovskaya and Panarin-. Specific to this particular discourse is the existence of Chinaas ominous triads.

From "Yellow Peril" to "China threat": from "enemy" to "opponent" "lthough the idea of the China threat carries similar connotation to Yellow Perill, it still indicates a shift in thinking between centuries. It is not merely, if at all, a question of differentiated treatment in the relationship to Yellows-and it is unlikely that anyone today would regard the Chinese, Japanese and Mongols as a single community with common interests merely on the basis of race. The fear of the Yellow Perill was based on the idea that Yellows represented an enemy with inhuman, alien logic and motivations for their actions.  The stranger " typical example is that of the Norwegian polar explorer and social activist Fridtjof Nansen, who demonstrated his humanitarian nature in a giant-scale assistance to refugees and displaced persons in a famine relief effort in the Volga region following World War I. Nansen organically and completely naturally thought in terms of racial differences, confrontation and inevitable battle between races for a mutual annihilation Nansen .

appears not in the guise of a concrete enemy with very real interests and constituting a serious, possibly lethal, threat. He becomes the personification of absolute evill, the embodiment of utter foreignness and fundamental incompatibility. He's the equivalent of the Devil. With him, any kind of negotiation, bargain or compromise is impossible. His logic simply cannot be understood. Conflict with him involves total confrontation, a mortal war that can only end with the annihilation of one of the parties. Gudkov argues:

The issue is not about specific nuisances or individual actors-an antagonist, an opponent, a socially dangerous individual, i.e. about actions that are predictable and understandable through their own specific reasons. To ensure an actor becomes an enemy, he must have a number of general characteristics: uncertainty and unpredictability, asocial force, ignorance of all regulatory or conventional constraints. With the emergence of the enemy, conventional systems of positive reward and incentives for cooperation do not work, or take second place From the enemy emerges a storm, a mortal danger to the very existence of the group .

The limits and lethalness of the threat follows from the fact that its vector is an individual of a fundamentally different world, an intelligent, reasoning creature that is not a human being.

With the disappearance of the epithet yelloww, racial discourse becomes peripheral in the analysis of social relations and problems. Racism, of course, remains, and racial differences continue to inform and reflect the nature of human connections and relationships, but the widespread notions of an unbridgeable gulf between races, and the vision of other races as aliens, has generally gone. The object of fear does not merely become concrete, it also becomes more rational. The enemy is becoming the opponent, and the imagined war of the worlds is transforming into a conflict between states and peoples. The horrifying vision of a collision between civiliations gives way to fears about Chinese expansionism, about an influx of migrants. The conception of threats translates onto a rational plane.

This shift could have far-reaching consequences. As a phobia becomes rationalised and as its mystical and transcendental component becomes peripheral, its mobilisation force is significantly reduced. Very indicative in this sense are the dynamics of anti-Chinese sentiments among the population of Siberia and the Russian Far East peaking in , they drastically decrease later with the intensification of economic and human contact with China and the Chinese. Moreover, recent studies show that migrants come to be regarded as an important resource which then requires protection "lyakher and Pegin-. This may become a guarantee, if only with respect to a rational immigration policy by the authorities. By using xenophobic sentiments as an instrument of power, occasionally contributing to their formulation and dissemination, the ruling elite are not immune to a boomerang effect. Sometimes they themselves become infected by the completely irrational fears created partly by them, thus leading them to irrational actions and decisions-often with disastrous consequences.

One of these consequences is clearly stated in the title of the book by David Shimmelpennink van der Oye Towards the Rising Sun: How Imperial Myth-making Led Russia Into War with Japan. It was precisely the syndrome of Yellow Perill that led to the catastrophe of the Russian-Japanese war. Similarly, Officer of the Imperial Russian Army "aron Roman Ungern von Sternberg attempted to organise a new Mongol invasionn against a rotten Europee Jozefovich. This farcical, but nonetheless bloody, episode in the Civil War waged in Siberia came about partly out of the sincere belief of its instigator that a yellow invasionn was inevitable and that it may be instrumentalised.

" complex combination of arrogant beliefs in the superiority of the white mann and powerful latent fears about an all-sweeping and devastating yellow wavee gave rise in , at the time of the "oxer Rebellion in China, to an extraordinarily intense panic in the vicinity of Blagoveshchensk. The panic of the population and the confusion of the authorities led to a pogrom in the course of which thousands of Chinese residing in the city were drowned in the waters of the "mur river Dyatlov-.