The phenomenon of the toonto nutag also represents a personal feeling of aging; ties with the toonto nutag change over the life-cycle and generate repeated returnn practices with the course of time. Ideally, a person should return to the place where his or her life started to signify the symbolical Folk worshiping practices at the toonto toonto murgekhe): a person should offer butter and put it on a stone marking the birth place at the old location of the ger (toonto taihan tohotei chulun); the same person should walk around the place (toonto goroolkho) and roll around naked on the ground (toontodoo khölvörkhö in order to embrace the earthh and absorb strength body from the sourcee in the ground containing personal vitality and life force. Nowadays people prefer a rather simplified version of the worshiping ritual: instead of rolling around naked on the ground as tradition required, people just lie down on the ground with their clothes on. Sometimes it is enough to scatter the soil of toonto nutag on one's hands and neck, to drink water from the local water source and wash one's face and other exposed parts of the body. Offerings of rice, biscuits, tea or milk are also made. Nowadays, when long distance migration (both within the national states and across the border) has become a common phenomenon, elders recommend that those who live far away should take with them a piece of stone from toonto, so that they can still feel in touch with the homeland. accomplishment of the life cycle, when one's death also symbolises transition to the next rebirth. Maurice Bloch noticed that in many cultures death is represented as a part of a repetitive cyclical order, and good death is that which occurs in the home, the place of the ancestors with living descendants to maintain the continuity of the lineage. "ad death, on the other hand, occurs at the wrong place, away from ancestoral shrines and thus represents the loss of regenerative potential "loch,. Similarly, "ulag writes that Mongol tradition held that one should be buried in onees natal land or homeland (törsön nutag after death.. "ulag .

That is why, especially in the diaspora perception, to pass away in a foreign land was perceived as a karmic punishment and a serious obstacle for a better rebirth. Strictly sealed off state borders with Soviet Russia (especially between the s and the end of the s denied migrant "uriads not only the opportunity to go back, but also the possibility of making a short visit to their toonto nutag and parental villages, which, in many cases, were just across the Russian border. "s some families remarked, Our nutag was the distance of a dog barking. Members of the second and the third diaspora generation recounting their family histories remember their parents facing their homeland to the north while telling their praying beads, showing their desire to return to their nutag before they died. After their tragic lives and death in exile they wished to access the lost homeland if not in this life then in the next rebirth and prayed to be reborn again at homeland nutagtaa khoito türelöö olokho).

This strong desire also likely influenced diasporic funeral practices. Reports of several researchers who visited the diaspora in Shenehen show burned corpses, as it was believed that bones should not be buried in foreign land, while the smoke of fires would take the souls of the dead back to the homeland Sanzhieva. Some informants also said that their parents on their deathbeds asked their children to visit their toonto nutag when the Russian state opens the pass khargei nekhe) through the border, thus symbolically bringing their souls back to toonto nutag. Surprisingly, the term nutag is also used for the binary opposing concept to homeland foreign land. For instance, the expression khari nutag can be translated as unknownn or foreignn land, an alienn and outsidee terrain. The way diasporic people now speak about their host society (which was a foreign land for their parents when they arrived) helped me to understand that the dual meaning of nutag was an effort to transform the foreignn land into homeland. Different verbal forms of the term nutag emphasise the different stages and emotional tension of this inversion.

Techniques of creating homeland in exile

Anthropologists writing about Mongolia have been intrigued by the different engagement of pastoralists with land and space, and they interpret the Mongolian concept of the landscape as an interactive field of engagement, where cyclical movement between different seasonal encampments can be viewed as passage from one kind of space to another, each time requiring an engagement in relations with the spiritual powers of the locality (Tserenhand Humphrey and Onon "ulag Sodnompilova , and others). They argue that pastures are traditionally not held as private property, since people associate land with spiritual and temporal agencies who are considered to be the owners, masters, or stewards of the land from which people live. Regular seasonal movement within a familiar landscape requires reestablishing relations with the owners of a locality each time upon arrival at summer or winter pastures, because after people leave a place a year ago or even longerr it becomes to a certain extent alienated.

People should remind the spirits about themselves and renew their ties with this segment of homeland by holding certain home making rituals.

Detailed descriptions of these rituals are found in the writings of the Mongolian ethnographer G. Tserenhand and the Russian ethnographer of "uriad origin, Klara "asaeva. They explain that movement from the winter encampment to summer pasture was highly ritualised. It included several blocks of rituals. These are enacted at the moments of departure, arrival at the new place, marking a chosenn place as already reserved (geriin on avakh), rituals of worshiping and symbolic payment to local spirits ejen, masters of the land) for the right to use their territory, rituals of feeding the master of the fire place in the newly erected ger, etc. Actually, moving away and separating from one encampment means homecoming to another encampment.