No tribal, league, or banner nobles and subjects were permitted to cross banner borders, nor were they allowed to marry across banners without authorization. The karun guards would make their record every day and the inspection report would be sent to Beijing regularly (Baoyinchaoketu 2003). Punishment was severe for any violations of borders, trespassing either into neidi, that is, inland China, or into others territory. For instance, Daqing Huidian Shili, published in the twenty-third year of Jiaqing reign , recorded the following Originally, should there be border violations from Mongolia, a prince would be fined 10 horses, zasag, beile, beizi, and gong horses, taiji five horses, and commoner, a cattlee. "y the second decade of the nineteenth century, the fine had been increased tenfold for aristocrats, and a commoner would lose all his property, including himself, which would be awarded to the whistle-blower Huidianguan vol. , pp.-. The fine soared further towards the end of the Qing, betraying an increase in violations and their seriousness.Such stringent prohibition of trespassing borders was to mould a divided unity of the Mongols under the Qing gurun or state. All Mongols were to identify with the Qing state, not as a politically unified nation (ulus), but through the banner system. It was intended to prevent the Mongols from realigning with each other and challenging the Qing, as it categorically prohibited princes from conquering each other, which was the classical mode for the rise of power among the nomads. Consolidation of the banner administrative system was designed to ensure political stability in the backyard of the Qing.

The long-term effect of the Qing governance was that there remained a general sense of Mongolness, aided by a historical memory and maintained by the Qing administration, and yet, the Mongol groups 11 "order clashes increased over years, sometimes escalating into major incidents. In , without the Qing imperial border control, the Otog and Ushin banners of the Yekejuu

League resorted to an all-out war over border violations, lasting for a year, and inviting mediation from the Chinese Communist Party. See Lifanyuan .

were deeply divided and suspicious of each other. This was the imperial legacy. "fter the collapse of the Qing, Mongolian nationalists did not find themselves facing a group of ethnically unconscious herders who could be easily molded into a Mongol nation, as Eugen Webers peasants would turn into Frenchmen; instead, they were confronted with a unified Mongol people with a clear consciousness of who they were, and yet who were deeply divided institutionally. In , when the Kharachin Mongol nationalist leaders of the Inner Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party came to Ordos, they were largely rejected by the Ordos members of the Party who formed the bulk of the Party's army. This Party was perhaps the first ever Inner Mongolian effort for a united action, but failed ignominiously thanks to the deeply entrenched banner divisionMongolian institutional division also frustrated the earlier effort for unification between Outer Mongolia and Inner Mongolia in-.

So did it lead to the internal split of Prince De's Mongolian autonomy movement in , not of course without external pressure by the local

Chinese warlord Fu Zuoyi (Bulag 2010b).

Nationalist Mongolian frustration at internal division was conducive to mythologising any sign of unity. Thus the "pril the Third Meeting

This is not to say that internal divisions have disappeared: far from it. What I am suggesting is that modern Mongolian nationalism has been built upon the historical Mongol identity created in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and institutionalised during the Qing Empire, and yet it is also a violent protest at the Qing imperial partitioning of the Mongols into numerous small groups. Mongol nationalism works on two sets of imperial legacy: first the boundary created and policed by the Manchu between the Mongols and the Chinese, which has been accepted as national border of the Mongols and which they fight to defend, but not always successfully; second, the borders between Mongol banners, which they think illegitimate and which they vow to dismantle or overcome, but not always successfully, either. The ethnic groups the Manchu helped maintain-Manchu, Mongols, Tibetans, Muslims, and Han-were internally divided groups. It is true that all communities show a degree of unity to the outside world while simultaneously remaining a site of internal tensionn "ellér-Hann. "ut the ethnic groups that emerged out of the Qing Empire were intended to be so, and this has been recognised by nationalists. This recognition gave rise to border-breaking political programs.

Breaking down provincial borders

The Manchu segregationist border building was not limited to non-Han peoples; even the Han Chinese were segregated from each other largely along provincial lines. The Qing provincial administration followed Ernest Gellners classical agrarian political structure, that is, a pyramid structure with the emperor at the top who ruled, through literati officials, vertically insulated communities, which were not allowed mutual communication without authorisation from the centre. In the Qing dynasty, this was done through provincial governors appointed by the imperial court. Qing-created provinces became cultural communities with distinct dialects, mind-sets, local cuisines and customs, even though they were unified by literary high culture and the imperial court.