Nothing is known of the species bionomics. The only report of its implication in malaria parasites transmission is from Baber and Olinger in 1931 (, loc. cit.) who reported 1 in 87 mosquitoes infected with sporozoites. Collections conducted in its type locality in 2005 reported few specimens (<10, Antonio-Nkondjio and Simard, unpublished data), probably reflecting habitat deterioration due to the expansion of the urban domain around Lagos.

From morphological analysis (), it appears that the type form could display high morphological variation with variants similar to An. m. nigeriensis and An. bervoetsi. However, genetic investigations and the follow-up of morphological diversity in the progeny of field collected gravid females demonstrated that a single taxon was represented, at least in CameroonPopulation genetic investigations using a set of ten microsatellite markersfurther strengthened this view, revealing genetic homogeneity between natural populations of An. moucheti in South Cameroon and throughout Central Africa, including Uganda and the DRCStudies comparing sequence variations in nuclear (rDNA Internal Transcribed Spacer 1, ITS2 and the D3 domain of the 28S ribosomal subunit) and mitochondrial (cytochrome b) DNA regions were also concordant, depicting a low level of genetic diversity and differentiation between specimens from Cameroon, Uganda and the DRC and confirming the high genetic homogeneity of An. moucheti populations throughout Central AfricaHowever, when mosquito samples collected from the type localities of An. bervoetsi and An. m. nigeriensis were included in the analyses, sequence differences were detected between the three taxa, similar in degree to the differences found previously between sibling species within other anopheline groups or complexesAn allele specific PCR assay based on sequence differences in the rDNA ITS1 region was developed to allow rapid identification of each of these three genetic lineages (Microsatellite analysis further demonstrated

significant genetic differentiation between An. bervoetsi populations form the DRC and An. moucheti populations from Cameroon, suggesting that they represent two different speciesIn light of accumulating evidences (morphological, behavioral and genetic differences) this taxa was raised to the rank of full species and named An. bervoetsiYet the issue of the taxonomic status of An. m. nigeriensis remains unresolved. It might still be considered as a variant of An. moucheti to be further studied.

3. Anopheles nili complex

Important morphological, ecological and behavioral differences among natural populations of Anopheles nili from sub-Saharan Africa suggested the existence of several taxonomic units and resulted in the description of four formal species, namely: Anopheles nili sensu stricto, An. somalicus, An. carnevalei and An. ovengensisMorphologically, these four species are very close from one another, differing only through subtle morphological characters present at the adult and/or at the larval stages (Apart from An. somalicus, which is zoophilic and was never incriminated in human malaria transmission, the three other members of the complex are highly anthropophilic and are vectors of malaria.

Anopheles nili s.s. is among the most important malaria vectors in sub-Saharan Africa. It has a wide geographic distribution range spreading across most of West, Central and East Africa mainly populating humid savannas and degraded rainforest areasLarvae thrive at the sunny edge of fast running streams and rivers, where floating vegetation and debris provide suitable sheltersForest populations are usually highly anthropophilic and feed regularly indoors whereas savanna populations are more exophilic and exophagicDespite feeding preferentially on humans, this mosquito can be, at times highly zoophilicAnopheles nili is usually responsible for a high nuisance to humans in villages along rivers, and abundance rapidly decreases within a few kilometers from the breeding sitesIt is also present at the periphery of urban areas.

The prevalence of Plasmodium infections in wild females typically ranges between 1 and 3%and transmission rate reaching 200 infective bites/human/year have been reported in the literature for An. niliReports on its epidemiological role in East Africa however, are scarce, dating back to the 1970sThere is no published record available for insecticide susceptibility in An. nili populations, although unpublished results from South Cameroon suggest full susceptibility to DDT and pyrethroids (permethrin and deltamethrin) using the diagnostic doses recommended for assessing An. gambiae populations (Etang et al., unpublished data). The analysis of key ecological factors associated with the distribution of An. nili larvae across 24 hydrographic networks in Cameroon showed that An. nili distribution conforms to that of a generalist species which is adapted in exploiting a variety of environmental conditions

Anopheles carnevalei and An. ovengensis are mainly distributed in deep forest areas where they take over An. nili s.s. in this environmentAnopheles carnevalei has been reported so far only from Côte d'Ivoire, Cameroon and Equatorial GuineaIt is rarely collected resting indoors and bites more frequently outdoorsThis mosquito is mostly zoophilic although it regularly feeds on humans in villages situated close to its breeding sites. Interestingly, although biting activity can be detected all night long, man-biting activity peaks early in the evening, between 6-7 PM, when inhabitants traditionally meet at the river for domestic and body care activitiesStudies conducted in Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea reported infection rates circa 1% in Cameroon, raising up to 24% when using PCR-based protocols for parasite detection in specimens from Equatorial Guinea