Risk classes that had less than100,000 hr per year were excluded from the analysis.

Self-Insured employers and the BLS data does not include public sector employees. It is unlikely that these two differences in populations explain the 4-fold difference in estimated rates. Although there had been some increase in CTS and other NTST-MSDs in Washington State between the late 1980s and mid 1990s, the increase had been quite modest compared to the rapid increase in rates reported by the BLS, suggesting potential underreporting especially in earlier BLS data. Rates have been decreasing for both systems since 1994, as have all injury and illness rates. The incidence of work-related CTS found in this study was 24.5 per 10,000 FTE over the years 1990±1998, while Franklin et al.

High Risk Industries

The focus of this study has been to identify high-risk industries for both research and prevention purposes. It should be noted that there are high-risk jobs in low-risk industries. However, we did not have adequate denominator data to determine incidence rates by occupation in this study.

We used three different approaches to identifying`` identifying``high-risk'' industries: frequency count, relative risk or rate ratio, and prevention index. Each has advantages and disadvantages depending on the goals. If we were interested in, e.g., reducing the overall number of claims by 10%, we would look for the industries where the most claims are occurring and perhaps focus educational campaigns in those industries. It is likely that the reason why there are so many claims is because these are large industries with many employees, even if the relative risk is low. An example of this can be seen with Restaurants inThis suggests that any speci®c restaurant may not have a high concentration of risk factors present. The relative risk or rate ratio is used to identify those industries at highest risk. We would expect to ®nd a higher concentration of risk factors present in most workplaces in these industries. This might be important in focusing inspection activities or research where contrasts in claims incidence rates may be important. However, if the highest risk industry has few employees, the overall industry impact of intervention activities might be small unless control measures have widespread utility. The Prevention Index was developed as a way to obtain the most impact in high-risk industries. It treats frequency and

relative risk as equally important. Depending on the type of intervention, education or research focus contemplated, weighting relative risk or incidence rate more heavily than frequency should be considered.

Based on State Fund compensable claims data, the Construction Sector is at highest risk but based on SelfInsured data, Transportation is at the greatest risk

Insured construction initiated prevention activities whereas the small residential contractor in the State Fund has not used the same strategy. It may be that the joint apprenticeship programs, (e.g., carpenter's apprenticeship program) have focused more on using ergonomics principles and workers from these apprenticeships tend to work for the larger Self-Insured employers. Although construction tasks are quite varied, they are characterized by manual handling of heavy materials, high peak hand force with periodic repetitive motions (sometimes with segmental vibration as in sawing and drilling), combined with awkward postures. Construction industries are not identi®ed in the top industries for repetitive motion disorders in the BLS data. This discrepancy may re¯ect our inclusion of``of``overexertion in lifting'' as a non-traumatic onset disorder (whereas the BLS separates overexertion from repetitive motion. It is unclear why the rates are increasing for Transportation among the Self-Insured (twice the State Fund rate in 1997), whereas they are decreasing for the State Fund employers. Additionally, the Self-Insured Public Administration employers have dramatically higher rates than for the State Fund employers. The reasons for this are not readily apparent.

Based on the State Fund Prevention Index and 4-digit WIC code for compensable back, neck and upper extremity NTST-MSDs, the top 10 high risk industries include nursing homes, state health care facilities, wood frame building construction, roo®ng, wallboard installation, moving companies, garbage collection, building construction NOC, concrete construction, and landscaping. For the SelfInsured, these include parcel package delivery, bus companies, airline ground crews, trucking NOC, schools-all other employees, warehouses NOC, Cities-all other employees, airline ¯ight crew, temporary help-administrative staff, and wholesale stores NOC. These industries are characterized by heavy manual handling tasks and should be the focus of prevention activities. Within the industries at highest risk (RR ! 2.5), occupations such as drywall installers, roofers, nursing aides, and bus drivers accounted for the majority of claims. For upper extremity NTST-MSDs, additional industries to include are Miscellaneous Food Preparation, Meat Products, Groceries, and Related Products. The Temporary help-assembly WIC was also identi®ed as being at high risk for NTST-MSDs in the State Fund data.

Self-Insured industries with rate ratios greater than 2.5 had the largest percentage of claims among occupations such as freight/stock handlers and bus or truck drivers. Other industries to include because they are in the top