In addition to low back and upper extremity disorders, we reviewed neck and lower extremity disorders. For this purpose, the validity of the codes for nature and type was scrutinized. The purpose was to see whether a distinction could be made between non-traumatic soft tissue disorders and other musculoskeletal disorders. We were unable to make this distinction consistently for lower extremity claims so excluded them from further analysis.

For the neck disorders, the nature coding was in agreement with the information in the medical ®les in 86% of the cases. Of the types, 88% of the codes were in agreement. The most common neck disorders were sprain and strain (in 43% of cases), cervicalgia (6%), dislocation (7%), displacement of intervertebral disc (3%), and radicular syndrome or radiculitis (3%). Of these diagnostic groups, radicular syndrome or radiculitis differed from the others in that about half of the cases were non-traumatic, whereas the proportion of non-traumatic cases for the other neck disorders was about 30%. The limited number of cases consistently diagnosed with radiculitis precluded further consideration of this diagnostic group separately in the analysis.

Washington State Employment by Industry and Region

Employment information is reported to L&I by State Fund employers as the number of hours worked by employees. Hours by age and gender are not available. Numbers of employees working per year were calculated assuming that each full-time employee works 2,000 hr per year (40 hr per week for 50 weeks per year). Hours were converted to full time equivalent workers (FTEs) as FTEs ˆ total hours reported/2,000. In those industries where there are a high proportion of part-time workers, the denominator may be an underestimate of number of workers at risk, making the incidence rate higher than it would be if therewere all full-time workers. An industrial classi®cation is a grouping of industries that share similar workplace exposures. Washington Industrial classi®cations are more speci®c than Standard Industrial Classi®cations (SIC) because employers must subclassify their employees based on type of work. Claim rates are presented also for SICs, because they allow a national comparison. To eliminate unstable rates, only those SIC codes with a minimum of 100 full time employees per year and those WIC codes with a minimum of 50 employees per year over the 9-year period were included in the industry analyses.

Self-insured compensable claims are not received and coded by L&I until they have been closed, thus this long lag time may result in our underestimating the number of claims in more recent years. Because claims data is incomplete for the self-insured, due to a high proportion of open claims, we used 1997 claims for the trend analysis.

Statistical Analysis

Descriptive analyses included a summary of claims by year, direct workers' compensation costs, lost time, age, and gender. Claim incidence rates were calculated by year and industry class, and are expressed as number of claims/ 10,000 FTEs. Each industry code speci®c rate was compared to the industry-wide rate and a crude incident rate ratio or relative risk was calculated. Severity rates were calculated as lost days/10,000 FTEs for claims matching the appropriate body area code. Test for trend of incidence rates over time was performed using a Poisson regression analysis in SAS Software (SAS Proprietary Software Version 7, SAS Institute, Inc.,Differences between rates were tested by Poisson regression with an interaction term for the compared rates. In this comparison, musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) claims were compared to non-musculoskeletal disorder (NMSD) claims and non-traumatic soft tissue musculoskeletal disorders (NTSD-MSDs) claims were compared to all claims excluding NTST-MSDs. The different categories within non-traumatic soft tissue disorders were compared to all claims excluding non-traumatic soft tissue disorders.

Costs per claim were adjusted for consumer price index and expressed as 1998 dollars, using multipliers of 1.25, 1.20, 1.16, 1.12, 1.10, 1.07, 1.04, and 1.02 for the years 1990±1997, respectively.

To prioritize industries for intervention purposes, frequencies of claims within an industry as well as the relative risk compared to all industries are important considerations. We combined the rank orders of both frequency and relative risk to create a ``Prevention Index'' (PI)

Because the prevention index is an average of two ranks, we also listed the top three industries by either count or rate below the line in Tables VI if those industries were not in the top 15 by prevention index. The 4-digit WIC classes with less than 50 full-time workers per year were excluded.

Occurrence and Direct Cost of Neck, Back, and Upper Extremity Disorders in Washington State

We describe the distribution of MSDs in Washington State between 1990±1998 with the focus on the neck, back, and upper extremity (shoulder-®ngers) and more speci®cally for the soft tissue musculoskeletal disorders of nontraumatic origin. The results are presented ®rst for the State Fund data (which is more complete) and then the compensable (4 or more days of lost time) Self Insured data, followed by combined State Fund and Self Insured compensable claims. Because we had no medical bill data with ICD-9 codes available for speci®c diagnoses for the selfinsured data, direct comparisons between the two are not really possible. Information is presented by Washington Risk Classi®cation (WIC) because these codes are more speci®cally related to workplaces with relatively similar processes and exposures than are Standard Industrial Codes (SIC) which are primarily used for commercial purposes.