Female Workers

The percentage of female claimants increased somewhat over the years 1990±1998 possibly re¯ecting the steady increase in the proportion of women in the work force since 1960. In Washington State, the female portion of the workforce increased from 45.3% in 1987 to 46.9% in 1995 [Washington State Of®ce ofThe average percentage of women claimants with hand/wrist NTST-MSD claims from 1990±1998 was 51% among the State Fund employers and 60.6% among the SelfInsured employers. This can be contrasted to 29.4 and 41.5%, respectively for Back NTST-MSDs. Women may differentially select or be selected into highly repetitive work that puts them at increased riskwhereas men are selected into heavy manual handling work (with the exception of health care).

Temporary Workers

Although there is a variety of temporary work situations (temporary agencies, leasing, independent contractor, etc.), we were only able to identify claims associated with temporary service agencies. Because of the rapid increase in temporary service agency employment over the study period, summary tables may actually underestimate the current rank order of frequency and incidence of musculoskeletal disorders in segments of this industry. For example, based on the 9-year overall incidence rate, Temporary services-assembly ranked 12th in the State Fund WIC industries for all compensable NTST-MSDs, 15th in compensable back, and 8th in compensable upper extremity NTST-MSDs. Among the Self-Insured, Temporary HelpAdministrative Staff is at high risk for both upper extremity and back disorders based on the prevention index. This WIC actually includes claimants who are temporary help workers in assembly, machine operators, etc. This most likely explains the extremely high rate ratio identi®ed. Because L&I does not manage the self-insured claims like the State Fund, there may be less oversight on the quality of the Self Insured data provided to L&I by the Self-Insured employers. Given the likely continued increase in temporary service employment due to many companies shifting high-risk low skill work away from permanent employees, we can expect to see these temporary service WICs at the top of the Prevention Index in the future. This change in the labor market presents a major challenge for developing effective prevention strategies.

Limitations and Strengths of Using Worker's Compensation Data

There were a number of limitations in this study. Potential misclassi®cation of the outcome measures is an important consideration. Underestimation of non-traumatic onset was identi®ed in the records review. This was particularly evident in the Self-Insured data. The use of broad industrial categories as surrogates for exposure may mask high-risk jobs in heterogeneously exposed industries. However, misclassi®cation of exposure is believed to be less for WIC than for SIC because WICs are more closely related to exposure (e.g., clerical workers in a factory have a different WIC than the factory workers), whereas SIC is related to commerce. The only major exception to this is Self-Insured Temporary Help employers who may be misclassifying the claimants using the central of®ce WIC rather than their actual employment.

The use of ANSI z16.2 codes of nature and type are cumbersome. This coding scheme should be replaced with the Occupational Injury and Illness Classi®cation System (OIICS) used by BLS but maintain the ICD-9 or ICD-10 codes as well.

Secondly, this study includes very limited data for the largest employers in the state who employ one-third of the workforce. In some respects, because smaller employers are more represented in the State Fund, costs may be overestimated due to the greater capacity of big employers to return employees to work, even in light duty jobs, thereby reducing lost time days and costs. Differences may also involve higher caseloads for workers compensation adjudicators for the State Fund compared to the Self-Insured, thus delaying the attention needed to address claims once they have been opened.

A third limitation is the inherent bias in reporting. The traumatic onset disorders tend to gain more ready acceptance in the workers compensation system than the more gradual or non-traumatic onset disorders. The medical records review indicated that the State Fund databases were useful for correctly identifying carpal tunnel syndrome, epicondylitis, rotator cuff syndrome, and that our coding scheme for determining non-traumatic soft tissue disorders was good for the neck, back, and upper extremity but poor for the lower extremity. For example, a random records review of knee and ankle disorders indicated that the vast majority is of traumatic origin.

In this study, we were able to de®ne speci®c disorders with non-traumatic onset using State Fund data. Among CTS cases, 86% were NTST claims, for epicondylitis, this was true for 78% of claims, for sciatica for 73% of claims, and for rotator cuff syndrome, 70% of claims.

We were also able to identify some emerging trends among workers in temporary service agencies. Hopefully, this ®nding will generate a closer look at health and safety issues affecting contingent workers.

Although much has been written about carpal tunnel syndrome, the magnitude and distribution of sciatica, rotator cuff syndrome, and epicondylitis have not been previously described in US working populations. Rotator cuff syndrome has an incidence of only two-thirds of that of CTS but it results in higher costs than CTS