Overall NTST-MSDs by industry sector

Of the State Fund Compensable NTST-MSDs, Construction, Manufacturing, and Transportation are the highest industry sectors based on the prevention indexConstruction is ®rst based on compensable CIR and second based on compensable claim count (n ˆ 24,700). The CIR was more than twice that of the overall industry rate. For the Self-Insured compensable claims, Transportation is ®rst on the prevention index, followed by Retail Trade and ManufacturingTransportation has the highest compensable CIR, about 1.8 Â that of all Self-Insured industry. Self-Insured construction is 8th on the prevention index based on both compensable rate and compensable count with an incidence rate less than the overall industry rate.

State Fund and Self Insured compensable claims incidence rates from 1992±1998 are show in Figures 4 and 5. Analysis was for 1992±1997 because Self-Insured hours were not available before 1992 and there are many 1998 Self Insured open claims that are not available for analysis, since they are not reported to L&I until they are closed. Although

a strict comparison between the Self-Insured and State Fund compensable claims rates is not possible, the differences in patterns are interesting. For the State Fund, the highest compensable claims incidence rate is for Construction that decreased dramatically through 1995 and then leveled off. For the Self-Insured, Construction rates are considerably lower than other industries, whereas Transportation is the highest and appears to be increasing. Finance and Public

Administration have had the lowest CIRs and were relatively stable among State Fund employers; whereas among the Self-Insured Public Administration employers, CIRs were higher than Services, Agriculture, Construction, Manufacturing, Wholesale Trade, and Finance. The only SelfInsured industries with relatively consistent downward trends in rates were Manufacturing, Wholesale, and Retail Trade. With respect to severity rates (lost workdays per

10,000 FTEs), there was virtually no change over time in Self-Insured Transportation (average yearly decrease of 1.1% and overall change of 5.6%), compared to more than 12% per year for Agriculture, Construction, and Manufacturing. For the State Fund, severity rates decreased between 9.2 and 11.4% per year. While severity rates (number of lost work days per 10,000 FTEs) decreased dramatically for all claims and for back injury claims between 1990±1997, they declined signi®cantly less for upper extremity NTST-MSDs,

NTST-MSDs by 4-digit Washington industrial risk classi®cation (WIC) code

The WIC codes allow a closer look at industries by similar types of processes or exposures for all injuries. While in general, the results are similar to those based on SIC code, there are some high-risk industries that do not show up in the SIC analysis.

State fund. Based on the Prevention Index (PI) for all NTST-MSDs, the top ®ve industries that were identi®ed by WIC were Nursing Homes, Wood Frame Building Construction, Wood Products Manufacturing, Roo®ng, and Wallboard Installation (WIC 0515).

For Back NTST-MSDs

*WICs by prevention index. Below rank15 are risk classes that were in the top three by rate or count that were not in the top15 based on prevention index. a Risk classes that had less than100,000 hr per year were excluded from the analysis.

Severity rates for compensable state fund claims1990^1998.

Staff was followed by Beer distributors (RR ˆ 8.7) and Brick or Clay Products Manufacturing (RR ˆ 7.1).

Although Temporary Help Administrative Staff should only have claims for staff of those large temporary help agencies, they also occasionally include temporary assembly, machine operator, etc., claimants that are sent to work in other companies.

Temporary help work

For the most part, the same industries were the top highrisk industries consistently throughout the 9-year period. However, a more recent trend that does not fully show up in the summary tables is the inclusion of temporary help agencies as high-risk industries. These agencies were separately classi®ed by type of work (e.g., assembly, machine operator, construction, food processing, and health care) in Washington Industrial Codes (WIC). Because their numbers were originally small but have been growing, it is useful to look at them by rank based on rate ratioThese rate ratios ranged from 4.0 to 21.0. Temporary helpassembly and temporary help-vehicle operation were prominent in the State-Fund ranks and Temporary helpadministrative staff was prominent in the Self Insured ranks. Temporary workers who do not work through a temporary help agency were not included in these estimates.

In this study, we looked at claims for general and selected speci®c hand/wrist, elbow, shoulder, and back disorders. The focus was on non-traumatic soft tissue musculoskeletal disorders (NTST-MSDs). These NTSTMSDs, when caused or aggravated by work activities (e.g., exposures to frequent or heavy manual handling, awkward postures, forceful or repetitive exertions) are referred to as work-related MSDs.

Magnitude and Direct Cost