Information extracted for each claim included: claim status (``compensable'' lost time claim of 4 or more days or medical treatment claim only codes); z16.2 codes for body area; nature; and type of disorder; 1-and 3-digit Standard Industrial Code (SIC); 4-digit Washington Industrial Code (WIC); claim identi®cation number; social security number; date of injury; birth date; gender; total cost of claim; days of time loss; dollar amount of time loss payments; and dollar amount of medical aid payments. Using ®rst date of injury allowed us to estimate claims incidence. For example, if in LINIIS, a ®rst date of injury year is 1990 and recorded for body area of hand/wrist, but the ®rst MIPS allowed bill with a CTS code is in 1991, for purposes of this analysis, this is a 1990 CTS claim.

We categorized non-traumatic and traumatic onset to differentiatè`cumulative'' trauma exposures from acute exposure, such as falls. A combination of body part and nature and type was required.shows the ANSI codes used to identify relevant conditions. Disorders not ful®lling the criteria for non-traumatic onset were considered traumatic (e.g., type was slips, trips, falls, struck by).

Data were extracted from L&I databases as of October 1999. Claim costs and time loss days reported here re¯ect actual totals for closed claims. For claims that were not closed, costs and time loss days re¯ect actual totals to this date plus total future estimated costs and time loss days, as calculated by agency actuarial staff. Cost and lost time data are expected to develop further for the most recent years. For example, as of October 1999, approximately 11% of all 1996 CTS claims were still open, as well as 19% of 1997 and 40% of 1998 claims. For non-traumatic soft tissue disorders, approximately 10% of 1998 claims were still open.

For Self-Insured compensable claims, we abstracted body part, nature, and type. We are less con®dent about the distinction between non-traumatic and traumatic onset status with the self-insured data because of incomplete information.

Validity of codes. All medical records relevant to the claim are stored in an imaging system for review. Numerous medical records abstraction exercises were conducted to evaluate the coding schemes used for both onset type (traumatic or non-traumatic) and speci®c diagnosis of upper extremity claims. In the ®rst exercise, we took a random sample of 96 Washington State Fund compensable claims coded as CTS (N ˆ 56), epicondylitis (N ˆ 15), and rotator cuff disorders (N ˆ 25) in MIPS. Each of these diagnoses was listed in the claimant medical record. This exercise demonstrated that the physician's statement on the medical records is accurately translated into the coding system of the L&I MIPS billing database. We also observed that CTS and epicondylitis are often mentioned together in a single claim, and that CTS is usually ®led as the main disorder. Thus, we would have underestimated the incidence of``of``elbow'' disorders because the epicondylitis case would be identi®ed under``under``hand/wrist.'' Additionally, the cost and lost time information for that epicondylitis case would be lost because we required body part be elbow and diagnosis be epicondylitis in order to avoid overestimation of costs for speci®c conditions. Overlapping diagnoses were identi®ed in 1.3% of the allowed medical bills for the upper extremity claims, 0.6% for both carpal tunnel syndrome and epicondylitis, 0.4% for carpal tunnel syndrome and rotator cuff syndrome, 0.2% for epicondylitis and rotator cuff syndrome, and 0.1% for all three diagnoses.

Electrodiagnostic studies were used to con®rm the diagnosis of CTS in 77% of cases. We also checked whether our de®nition for a traumatic or non-traumatic onset disorder, based on our selected codes, agreed with information from the medical records, in which it was very clear whether the onset was traumatic or non-traumatic. There was 76% agreement for the hand/wrist, 77% for elbow disorders, and 64% for the shoulder disorders.

The second exercise involved abstracting medical records from 100 random claims from 1995 that we classi®ed as``as``traumatic carpal tunnel syndrome'' and 98``98``nontraumatic onset hand/wrist disorders.'' The case de®nition 1 ``Criteria for acceptance of occupational disease claims are different than occupational injury claims which only need tòoccur in the course of employment.' Occupational disease claims must include the following:

A physician must present an opinion that work conditions, on a moreprobable-than-not basis (greater than 50% chance), are the cause of the illness or have temporarily or permanently aggravated a preexisting condition; and Objective medical ®ndings must support the diagnosis; and The disease must arisè`naturally and proximately'' out of employment'' [Of®ce of thefor CTS included symptoms in the median nerve distribution, and one of the following: positive electrodiagnostic study, carpal tunnel release surgery or positive physical examination (Tinel's, Phalens, 2-point discrimination or thenar atrophy). Eighty-one percent of the ®rst group and 43% of the second group met the case de®nition for CTS. All of those coded as non-traumatic onset met the de®nition. Of those that were coded traumatic onset, 64% were actually non-traumatic onset. This suggests that we would underestimate the incidence rate for non-traumatic onset hand/wrist disorders. For rotator cuff disorders, about 30% of the claims coded as traumatic were non-traumatic.