and repetitive work characterize the industries with the highest risk.

INTRODUCTION

The prevention of work-related musculoskeletal disorders such as carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) and low back disorders has been a focus of international prevention efforts [US Department of] that include regulation; Washington State Department ofThis study examines workers compensation claims in Washington State to provide baseline data from which to assess the need and the effects of prevention activities. We used newly-accepted workers' compensation claims data from Washington State to examine the frequency, incidence, cost, and industry distribution of new neck, back and upper extremity (hand/ wrist, elbow, and shoulder) disorders, and sciatica, carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), epicondylitis and rotator cuff syndrome (RCS) as examples of more speci®c diagnoses within these body region categories.

Sciatic syndrome or sciatica is the major clinical manifestation of lumbar disc herniation. Sciatic pain is manifested as radiating back pain that goes below the knee. This very sensitive (95%) indicator of lumbar disc herniation has been associated with manually handling heavy loads. CTS is a compression neuropathy of the median nerve at the wrist. Work-related risk factors include high repetition, high hand force, awkward wrist postures, and segmental vibrationEpicondylitis is an af¯iction of the origin of wrist extensors (lateral epicondylitis or tennis elbow) or ¯exors (medial epicondylitis or golfer's elbow) at the elbow. Repetitive forceful activities such as twisting or pronation of the forearm while gripping have been associated with epicondylitis. Rotator cuff syndrome involves in¯ammation, degeneration and tear of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and subscapularis tendons about the shoulder. Work-related shoulder disorders have generally been attributed to high static or repetitive loads on the shoulder girdle, particularly in combination with abduction, rotation or ¯exionTendon tears may also have an acute traumatic onset (e.g., falls).

Although the prevalence or incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome has been described previously], the occurrence of sciatica, epicondylitis, and rotator cuff syndrome are less well known.

The aim of this study was to assess the occurrence and direct cost of non-traumatic soft tissue (NTST) disorders in the neck, back, and upper extremity in general, and of the speci®c disorders of sciatica, rotator cuff syndrome, epicondylitis, and CTS. Additionally, we wanted to identify highrisk industries for these disorders so both research and prevention efforts can be more focused.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Workers' Compensation System

In Washington State, employers (except the selfemployed) are required to obtain workers' compensation insurance through the Department of Labor and Industries' (L&I) industrial insurance system unless they are able to self-insure. L&I's State Fund covers approximately twothirds of the workers in Washington State (the remaining one-third works chie¯y for the approximately 400 largest employers that are self-insured). Washington is the only state in which workers contribute a portion of their income to the medical aid portion of the State Fund.

Claims management database

Workers' compensation claims data and employment data for the years 1990±1998 was obtained from L&I's ®les. The L&I claims management database consists of two major data processing systems. The Medical Information and Payment System (MIPS) receives all billing information generated by provider medical bills. This system records such relevant items as dates of service, all associated procedure and treatment (CPT) codes (e.g., 64721 is median nerve decompression at the carpal tunnel, 23412 for repair ruptured rotator cuff-chronic), and physician diagnosis by International Classi®cation of Disease (ICD version 9) code for each provider visit. The Labor and Industries' Industrial Insurance System (LINIIS) contains all data necessary for the administration of State Fund claims (e.g., claim type and nature, occupation, employer information, lost time, status, and progress). The LIINIS system Uses ANSI z16.2 codesfor nature, type, body part affected, and source of injury. Only those Self-Insured claims resulting in more than 3 days of lost time are coded in the LINIIS system.

De®nition of outcome

We used accepted State-Fund claims (for the 1990± 1998 period, approximately 10% of the State Fund claims were rejected).Further, we only included claims with approved bills for speci®c diagnoses codes or appropriate CPT procedure codes respectively. In addition, we extracted any claim that had a wrist or hand condition (or both) from the LINIIS claim history dataset by using the ANSI z16.2 code for body area. Similar methods were used to extract claims for general back, elbow, and shoulder disorders. The speci®c disorders were de®ned as accepted claims based on claims with codes and/or CPT procedure codes.

As a workers compensation claim in Washington State may include disorders in more than one body part, only the primary site is assigned a z16.2 code. When speci®c disorders (such as CTS for hand/wrist disorders) were examined in detail to determine type of onset, disorders were required to match the appropriate body area code (since type and nature of disorder are only speci®ed for the primary site of disorder).