Hiroki Kuroda pitched six-plus strong innings as the Los Angeles Dodgers clinched victory over the Philadelphia Phillies.

Blake DeWitt highlighted a five-run opening frame with a three-run triple and Manny Ramirez scored a pair of runs for the Dodgers, who now trail two games to one in the best-of-seven series.

Kuroda (1-0) allowed an RBI single to Pedro Feliz in the second before retiring the next 13 batters. The Japanese righthander allowed three hits in the seventh before being replaced by Cory Wade.

Kuroda, who tossed 6 1/3 scoreless frames in his first playoff start in the NL Division Series, was charged with two runs and five hits while walking one and striking out three.

The Dodgers exploded in the first off lefthander Jamie Moyer (0-1), getting singles from Furcal and Andre Ethier before Ramirez plated the first run with an RBI single. Moyer then hit Russell Martin with a pitch and struck out Nomar Garciaparra before Casey Blake made it 2-0 in favor of Los Angeles with a single to right.

Matt Kemp struck out but DeWitt followed with his triple to cap the five-run frame. It was DeWitt's first hit in six at-bats in the NLCS.

Moyer allowed a leadoff home run to Furcal in the second and got Ethier to fly out before being removed. The 45-year-old Moyer, who did not suffer a loss in any of his last 10 regular season starts, has lost both of his starts in the postseason, combining to allow eight runs and 10 hits in 5 1/3 innings.

Tempers flared in the third when Kuroda sent a fastball above the head of Shane Victorino. The Phillies' No. 2 hitter pointed at the mound, gesturing to Kuroda to throw at his ribs, not his head. After Victorino grounded out to end the frame, the benches cleared, leading to some light pushing and shoving.

Kuroda's throw appeared to be in retaliation of Martin getting hit by Moyer in the first, while Garciaparra added an RBI single in the fourth and finished his first start of the series 2-for-3.

Pat Burrell got a run back for the Phillies in the seventh, plating Chase Utley with a single to center.
