Schumacher's men slam tests

Representatives of Stefan Schumacher have condemned the doping procedures which led to a positive test for the cyclist.

The 27-year-old tested positive for the new generation of the banned blood booster EPO both before and during the Tour, after samples were re-tested at the French laboratory in Chatenay-Malabry.

The German cycling federation (BDR) revealed earlier this week they had begun an investigation into the tests after receiving confirmation of the results from Germany's national anti-doping agency (NADA).

The body had asked Schumacher to provide a written response or request a B-sample test within five working days.

Schumacher tested positive for CERA following tests taken on July 3, before the start of the Tour, and on July 15, a rest day.

But Schumacher's lawyer feels the re-tests have left room for doubt.

A statement from Dr Michael Lehner read: "Stefan Schumacher's blood levels at the entry check for the Tour de France on July 3 and at the check on the rest day July 15 were not only each without complaint, but rather in an absolutely inconspicuous area.

"The A samples analysed immediately after both doping checks were negative, without a doping finding.

"Under which circumstances and which blood tests have allegedly tested positive for CERA three months later in a laboratory in Chatenay-Malabry, is, according to the information available up until now, completely unclear."

Schumacher won two time trials at the Tour and briefly wore the yellow jersey before a crash near the end of stage six knocked him down the standings.

A statement from his manager Heinz Betz read: "I am absolutely against every form of doping and cheating in sport. And should it be proven that Stefan has doped, I will end the relationship.

"But because there is valid doubt in this case, I stand behind my client.

"The whole procedure of the alleged doping findings raises, according to the information of my client, many questions.

"Stefan himself is on the ground, destroyed. He will speak himself in time."

The Stuttgart public prosecutor has commenced a fraud investigation against Schumacher, according to reports in Germany.

Schumacher could face a two-year ban from cycling if he is found guilty of doping.
