Sialkot will be the unknown package
Sialkot Stallions could well be the team to watch out for in the Champions League T20 to be played in India this year.
It was the story of the city rat versus the village rat. It was the story of Shahid Afridi versus Shoaib Malik. It was the story of Karachi Dolphins versus the Sialkot Stallions. In the fitness of things, Malik's Sialkot triumphed in the final of the Pakistan T20 championship in Lahore, last week.

I am not surprised by the result. For many of you who do not follow Pakistan cricket, this has been Sialkot's hattrick of T20 titles and I am happy, Malik led from the front. Malik has been under a lot of pressure of late. Last Wednesday night at Gaddafi, Sialkot rode a fine all-round show from their captain (2 for 29 and 19 not out off 23 balls). Hopefully, this will stop the debate on who should lead Pakistan in Tests and ODIs. Malik is relatively consistent and a big stage performer.

Sialkot's win once again enforces my view that there is a whole lot of talent waiting to be tapped in our smaller towns. Watch out for this boy Adeel Malik. His unbeaten 23 off 11 balls hastened Sialkot's comprehensive 7-wicket win. And I am sure there are many like Adeel who want to rise through the ranks. The ‘big' town lads in both India and Pakistan are too busy these days. There are too many distractions. The ‘small' town lads are making an impact. Sialkot is a glaring example.

Now comes the big stage: Champions League. I think Sialkot will be worthy representatives of Pakistan. They will surely be the underdogs, but don't count them out. An unknown team is always dangerous and Sialkot have the ingredients to explode on a big day. More than anything else, Sialkot will truly be a Pakistani outfit. Unlike the two Indian teams peppered with foreigners, Sialkot will play for national pride as well.

It's silly to pick a Champions League favourite. In 20-20 cricket, there is a no clear favourite. But yes, the Indian teams, Rajasthan and Chennai, will have an edge because they will play in front of home crowds.

Our T20 championship was a great success. People thronged the stadiums to watch the games. There were no security issues and cricket was enjoyed the way it should be. Australia and the West Indies, are you listening?

Former Pakistan Test captain Wasim Akram is an ESPN-STAR expert
