YOGA, MEDITATION AND THE WORKPLACE
How many times does one listen to an exasperated Give me a break will you? This is the condition of a modern lifestyle a person is always searching for a break to distress himself. Days turn into weeks, months years and suddenly there is a realization that life has moved a fast pace. Who has the time to stop and pause and take stock of life as it rushes past. Suddenly it's too late. People are now waking up to the harsh reality of the stress factors at the workplace which not only affects employee morale but also affects productivity, efficiency and quality. Taking lessons from history companies are looking at spirituality and meditation for employee health.

Modern techniques and yogic practices have helped in employee performance, morale and attitude. Yoga and Meditation are an important aspect of Indian culture which has been increasingly adopted in the west.

Let us understand the meaning of yoga and its significance in today's world. In Sanskrit yoga means union, connection, and mental concentration. The Sanskrit root yuj means to bind, join, attach and yoke, to direct and concentrate ones attention to use and apply. So yoga is union of mind and body. It also means union or communion. It is the true union of our will
with the will of god. It is achieved by eight fold yogic practice:

. Forbearance
. Self discipline
. Yogic postures
. Proper breathing
. Restraint
. Attention
. Contemplation
. Meditation

To gain higher mental faculties and better physical fitness, regular practice of yoga is a must for an individual striving to achieve greater happiness. Yoga is a way of living tried/ tested/ practiced and proved for thousands of years in ancient India and now world over as the best method for any individual to keep fit mentally and physically.

Yoga has also been described as wisdom in work or skilful living amongst activities, harmony and moderation. 'Yoga is not for him who gorges too much, nor for him who stays awake. By moderation in eating and in resting, by regulation in working and by concordance in sleeping and waking, yoga destroys all pain and sorrow'.

Gandhi felt that 'the yoking of all the powers of body, mind and soul to god; it means the disciplining of the intellect, the mind, the emotions, the will, which that yoga presupposes; it means a poise of the soul which enables one to look at life in all its aspects evenly'.

Concept and Process of Meditation

Meditation concentration in its extreme form and the need to cleanse and heal one's body and soul meditation is necessary.

. Dharana (Concentration) is one pointed attention of the mind on the object of meditation. In dharna the concentration is intense and there is always the awareness that you are concentrating. If dharana continues for some time it eventually moves into Dhyana

. Dhyana is the next stage, which should have two components. There should be a continuous awareness of the single object of meditation and also awareness that you are practicing unbroken concentration but without the effort or intensity needed previously in dharana. It becomes more effortless as mind isolates itself from the sensory impressions.

. Samyama is the Sanskrit name given in the yoga sutras to describe the inner esoteric meditative process. Samyama is the total process, which begins after the pratyahara (sensory withdrawal) stage has been successfully completed

. Samadhi is the final stage of samyama and the door to self- realization and Moksha. In Samadhi the awareness that you are concentrating disappears totally and you merge or become one with the object of meditation. The object alone remains, constantly illumining your total awareness and becoming more vivid.

. An important distinction happens here as simultaneously you loose awareness of the process of becoming (merging) with the object and also you loose awareness totally of your self (mind, body, thoughts, etc) and  enter Laya.

. In the first stage of Samadhi, Laya (absorption) is experienced. Mind enters a region known as (Shoonya) or the void and the object of meditation disappears temporarily.

. To reach the inner study of his or her being this is the meditative process that must be followed.

Health & Yoga

According to the yoga sutras, we must first perfect the external practices of yoga before we attempt to look inwards in search of our spirituality. Therefore in keeping with this discipline, I will first of all explore the physiological aspects of ageing before looking for yoga practices that will delay its assault.

. The success of antibiotics and improved medical technology presents society with an increasing number of aged populations.

.As these numbers increase so too does the incidents of cancers, cardiovascular, dementia and other degenerative diseases and although there are many theories expressed, there are no definite cures for them at this time.

. Yoga provides a preventative measure against disease more then a cure, although in some instances certain practices will facilitate the healing process.

. People ask whether yoga has something to offer to cure diseases such as cancer.

. Therapies have been diverse, they have been unscientific and therefore unacceptable to many of us but we cannot deny that they have been instrumental in some cases in the past.
Yoga may not have provided instant cure to many chronic ailment or to even illnesses such as cancer yet the practice of yoga has helped the people to remain healthy. Those who practice Meditation and yoga have few instances of cancer or such deadly diseases. Yoga is also known to address most diseases such as hypertension and diabetes. It is best prescribed with full knowledge of medical history and following scientific examinations, which requires sound understanding of anatomy and physiology.
